# Genetic risk of inflammatory bowel disease is associated with disease course severity
**Authors:** Vestergaard, M. V.; Allin, K. H.; Noehr, A. K.; Lominchar, J. V. T.; Christensen, H. S.; Krarup, H.; Nielsen, K. R.; Jacobsen, H. A.; Bybjerg-Grauholm, J.; Baekvad-Hansen, M.; Broendum, R. F.; Boegsted, M.; Larsen, L.; Sazonovs, A.; Jess, T.
**DOI:** 10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569 | **Published:** 2025-05-08
**Subject:** Clinical Trials | **Method:** API

## Abstract
Background and aimsGenetic susceptibility to inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) has been widely studied, whereas the genetic contribution to disease progression over time remains relatively under-investigated. In a Danish nationwide cohort, we aimed to explore if genetic susceptibility to IBD is associated with disease severity.

MethodsWe estimated polygenic scores (PGS) for IBD susceptibility for 3,732 patients with Crohns disease (CD), 4,535 patients with ulcerative colitis (UC), and 9,469 controls, and investigated their association with disease outcomes, including inflammatory markers, hospitalizations, major surgeries, and medication use. A composite severity outcome was defined based on the first three years following diagnosis. Lastly, we evaluated disease extent as a possible mediator of the association.

ResultsIncreased susceptibility PGS was associated with higher fecal calprotectin and C-reactive protein levels, and decreased hemoglobin levels. When comparing the highest versus lowest PGS quintile, we observed a hazard ratio (HR) for major surgery of 2.74 (P=7.19x10-18) in patients with CD and of 2.04 (P=4.36x10-7) in UC. Patients with severe disease had higher susceptibility PGS than patients with less severe disease (CD: OR=1.25, P=3.36x10-9; UC: OR=1.33, P=1.40x10-15 per SD increase in PGS). Additionally, PGS was associated with a higher need for corticosteroids, immunomodulators, and biologic therapies. Adjusting for disease extent reduced the estimated associations for CD but had little impact on observed associations for UC.

ConclusionPatients with higher genetic burden for developing IBD also experience a more severe disease course. For patients with CD this link was largely mediated by disease extent, however, this was not the case for UC, which suggests a shared genetic architecture between disease susceptibility and severity.

## Content
Genetic risk of inflammatory bowel disease is associated with disease course
severity
Authors: Marie Vibeke Vestergaard1*, Kristine Højgaard Allin1,2*, Anne Krogh Nøhr1*, Jesus Vicente
Torresano Lominchar1, Heidi Søgaard Christensen1, Henrik Krarup3, Kaspar René Nielsen4, Henrik Albæk
Jacobsen1,2, Jonas Bybjerg-Grauholm5, Marie Bækvad-Hansen5, Rasmus Froberg Brøndum1, Martin Bøgsted1,
Lone Larsen1,2#, Aleksejs Sazonovs1#, Tine Jess1,2#
1Center for Molecular Prediction of Inflammatory Bowel Disease (PREDICT), Department of Clinical
Medicine, Aalborg University, Copenhagen, Denmark
2Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark
3Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Aalborg University Hospital, and Department of Clinical Medicine,
Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark
4Department of Clinical Immunology, Zealand University Hospital, Næstved, Denmark
5Center for Neonatal Screening, Department for Congenital Disorders, Statens Serum Institute, Copenhagen,
Denmark
*, # Contributed equally
Corresponding author:
Marie Vibeke Vestergaard
Center for Molecular Prediction of Inflammatory Bowel Disease (PREDICT), Department of Clinical Medicine,
Aalborg University
A. C. Meyers Vænge 15, 2450 København, Denmark
Email: marievv@dcm.aau.dk, Phone: +45 42963689
Word count: 3358
Number of main tables and figures: 5
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569

## Abstract

Background
Genetic susceptibility to inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) has been widely studied, whereas the genetic
contribution to disease progression over time remains largely unknown. In a unique population-based
cohort, we explored if genetic susceptibility to IBD associated with disease course severity.

## Methods

In a Danish nationwide cohort of 3688 patients with Crohn’s disease (CD), 4491 patients with ulcerative
colitis (UC), and 9469 controls, we estimated polygenic scores (PGS) for IBD susceptibility. We then
investigated the association between susceptibility PGS and severe versus less severe disease courses.
Patients were categorized as having a severe disease course if needing I) at least two IBD-related
hospitalizations exceeding two days, II) at least two IBD-related major surgeries, III) one hospitalization and
one major surgery not overlapping in time, or IV) total use of minimum 5000 mg systemic corticosteroids
within the first three years of diagnosis. Secondary analyses explored the association with other severity
measures including inflammatory markers, exposure to biologics and immunomodulators, and time to
hospitalization and major IBD-related surgery. Statistical analyses included logistic, linear, and Cox
proportional hazards regression, and predictive modeling using random forest.
Findings
Patients with severe disease courses had higher susceptibility PGS than patients with less severe disease
courses (CD: OR=1·27, P=7·73×10-10, UC: OR=1·35, P=7·29×10-17 per SD increase in susceptibility PGS). When
comparing the highest versus lowest PGS quintile, we observed a hazard ratio (HR) for major surgery of 2·74
(P=7·19×10-18) in patients with CD and 2·04 (P=4·36×10-7) in patients with UC. A higher susceptibility PGS
was also associated with longer and more frequent hospitalizations, higher levels of C-reactive protein,
decreased hemoglobin, and a higher need for corticosteroids, immunomodulators, and biologic therapies.
Interpretation
Patients with a higher genetic burden for developing IBD also experience a more severe disease course,
suggesting a shared genetic architecture between disease susceptibility and severity.
Funding
Danish National Research Foundation, DNRF148, Lundbeck Foundation, R313-2019-857, Novo Nordisk
Foundation, NNF23OC0087616, Danish Colitis Crohn Association.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569

## Introduction

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic, progressive, immune-mediated intestinal disease with an
increasing incidence and prevalence globally. The two most common subtypes of the disease are Crohn’s
disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC).1,2 Patients are often diagnosed in early adulthood and experience a
serious, life-altering condition that does not currently have a curative treatment. The disease course is
highly heterogeneous, ranging from relatively mild symptoms to severe disease characterized by
uncontrolled gastrointestinal inflammation and repeated hospitalizations and surgeries.3,4 A better
understanding of which patients will experience a more severe disease course would be the first step to
improve treatment of this subgroup. However, our current limited understanding of IBD and the factors
driving its heterogenicity makes it difficult to anticipate a patient’s disease course.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of IBD have primarily focused on disease onset by comparing
patients with IBD to population controls. To date, more than 600 susceptibility loci have been identified.56
However, the genetic contribution to disease progression over time remains largely unknown. In an analysis
of approximately 2700 patients with CD performed by Lee et al.,7 four individual loci were associated with
the need for immunomodulators or gastrointestinal surgeries. These loci were not associated with disease
susceptibility.
Polygenic scores (PGS) use the results from GWAS to calculate the aggregated effect of trait-associated
variants carried by an individual. To date, PGS has primarily been used to model the individual risk of
disease onset for complex diseases where a well-powered, large-scale GWAS exists. For IBD, PGS can predict
disease onset with limited performance (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) =
0·63) and only identifies ~3.2% of the population with a threefold increased risk of IBD.8 As for genetics
overall, very little is known about the impact of genetics on the course of IBD. Although a strong association
between PGS and disease location has been reported,9 previous studies have failed to identify an
association between susceptibility PGS and anti-TNF response,10 early onset,11 and CD severity stratified by
disease location.7
In a large, unique population-based IBD cohort with both genetics and long-term clinical data, we
investigated the hypothesis that an individual’s genetic burden, as measured by their IBD susceptibility PGS,
impacts the severity of the disease course.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569

## Methods and materials

Danish registries
The study was based on data from Danish registries, including the Danish Civil Registration System,12 The
Danish National Patient Registry (DNPR),13 The Danish National Prescription Registry,14 and The Danish
nationwide Registry of Laboratory Results for Research (RLRR)15. They hold information on inpatient hospital
contacts, International Classification of Diseases 8th and 10th revision (ICD-8 and -10) codes, surgical and
other procedures since 1977, outpatient contacts since 1995, redeemed prescriptions for Danish residents
at all pharmacies since 1994, and results of biochemistry and hematological tests from hospitals and
general practitioners since 2008 with complete coverage from 2015. We had data available until September
2022. All registry codes used are listed in Table S1.
Source populations
The PREDICT neonatal blood spot cohort (PREDICT-NBS cohort). The Danish National Biobank stores
neonatal blood spots from almost all Danes born since 1982.16 The PREDICT-NBS cohort includes neonatal
blood spots from individuals born and diagnosed with IBD between April 1981 and December 2018.
Identification of patients with IBD was based on previously described criteria.2 IBD patients should have at
least two IBD-related hospital registrations within a two-year period recorded in the DNPR. Assignment of
CD or UC was based on the two most recent hospital contacts if these were concordant, and otherwise
according to the highest number of diagnoses. Date of diagnosis was the date of the first IBD-related
hospital registration. Patients not living in Denmark during the two years before this first IBD-related
hospital registration were excluded to ensure a valid date of diagnosis. Each IBD patient was matched to
controls based on sex, date of birth, and no diagnosis of IBD prior to the patient’s diagnosis date. Matched
controls that developed IBD from end of cohort selection (December 2018) to end of available registry data
(September 2022) were considered IBD patients.
The North Denmark IBD cohort (NorDIBD). The NorDIBD cohort is a population-based cohort of all patients
from the North Denmark Region with a confirmed IBD diagnosis from 1978 to 2020.17 From this cohort, 940
patients with IBD and a further 973 blood donors with no IBD diagnosis were genotyped from whole blood.
The date of IBD diagnosis was based on patient health records.
Overlapping individuals between the two cohorts (n=233) were excluded randomly from one of the cohorts.
Details on genotyping, quality control, and generation of genetic principal components (PCs) are previously
described18 and available in Supplement 1 and summarized in Figure S1.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
Study population
We excluded patients diagnosed with IBD before January 1, 1996, and after September 2019, to ensure at
least three years of post-diagnosis follow-up in the registries. This resulted in a final study population of
3688 patients with CD (3340 from the PREDICT-NBS cohort and 348 from the NorDIBD cohort), and 4491
patients with UC (4153 from the PREDICT-NBS cohort and 338 from the NorDIBD cohort) (Figure S2).
Polygenic score
We downloaded and applied to our dataset variant loadings for calculating PGS for CD and UC susceptibility
generated by Middha et al.19 They generated variant loadings from summary statistics from IIBDGC20
calibrated on UK Biobank data. We calculated PGS using Plink; 738,417 out of 744,682 (>99%) and 738,314
out of 744,575 (>99%) available variants were included for calculating CD and UC susceptibility PGS
respectively. We also calculated CD and UC susceptibility PGS for the controls. The mean (SD) of CD PGS
across controls and CD patients was 1.00 (1.27) and the corresponding mean (SD) of UC PGS across controls
and UC patients was -0.95 (1.01). The PGS scores were normalized to standard deviations (SDs) from the
mean value to improve interpretability.
Outcomes
Our primary outcome was severe versus less severe disease course. We defined a severe IBD course based
on having one of the following outcomes within three years after date of diagnosis: I) two or more IBD-
related hospitalizations exceeding two days, II) two or more IBD-related major surgeries, III) one IBD-related
hospitalization and one IBD-related major surgery not overlapping in time, or IV) a total use of at least 5000
mg systemic corticosteroids (Figure S3). The threshold for systemic corticosteroids was set based on
visualization of the data. Patients not fulfilling these criteria were considered less severe.
Secondary outcomes were age at diagnosis, and the following outcomes within three years after date of
diagnosis: two or more IBD-related hospitalizations exceeding two days, two or more IBD-related major
surgeries, one or more IBD-related major surgeries, a total use of at least 5000 mg systemic corticosteroids,
treatment with biologics, treatment with immunomodulators, other inflammatory immune mediated
diseases (IMDs), and days spent in hospital due to IBD. Additionally, we analyzed time to first IBD-related
hospitalization and time to first IBD-related major surgery. Finally, we examined markers of inflammation
i.e., C-reactive protein (CRP), fecal calprotectin (f-calpro) and hemoglobin at time of diagnosis and during
follow-up. At diagnosis was defined as ± six months from the date of diagnosis, and the post-diagnosis
phase was defined as three years starting from six months after date of diagnosis. Definitions and codes for
primary and secondary outcomes are listed in Table S1.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
Statistical analyses
We analyzed the association between susceptibility PGS and the primary outcome (severe versus less
severe IBD) using logistic regression, adjusting for sex, cohort, calendar year, age at diagnosis, and the first
ten PCs. A similar model was used for the analysis of the binary secondary outcomes (two or more IBD-
related hospitalizations exceeding two days, two or more IBD-related major surgeries, one or more IBD-
related major surgeries, a total use of at least 5000 mg systemic corticosteroids, treatment with biologics,
treatment with immunomodulators, and other IMIDs). For the continuous secondary outcomes (age at IBD
diagnosis and days spent in hospital due to IBD), we used linear regression adjusting for the above-

## mentioned covariates. All results are per SD increase of susceptibility PGS.

For analysis of time to first hospitalization and first major IBD-related surgery, we divided patients into PGS
quintiles and used Cox proportional hazards regression models to test for differences across PGS quintiles.
These survival analyses included patients previously excluded based on not having three years of follow-up
(CD=44, UC=44), and censoring was based on death, emigration, or end of study. The model included
adjustment for sex, cohort, calendar year, age at diagnosis, and the first ten PCs.
At- and post-diagnosis biochemistry test values of CRP, f-calpro, and hemoglobin were evaluated for
association with susceptibility PGS (per SD increase) using a linear regression model including the above-
mentioned covariates. Where there were multiple samples per individual, the sample closest to date of
diagnosis was chosen for the at-diagnosis interval, whereas the median value was chosen for the post-
diagnosis interval. Test values were transformed using log transformation for CRP and f-calpro to approach a
Gaussian distribution.
Reported p-values from tests of secondary outcomes and from biochemistry test values were adjusted for
multiple testing using the Bonferroni correction.
Prediction models
Random forest models were generated for predicting severe CD and UC based on patient information
available at date of diagnosis. We fitted a baseline model only including the covariates sex, cohort, calendar
year and age at diagnosis, parental IBD status, and having other IMIDs at time of diagnosis. The baseline
model was expanded to evaluate the increase in predictive power of adding a) susceptibility PGS, b) CRP,
and f-calpro test results within ± six months from the date of diagnosis, and c) both susceptibility PGS, CRP,
and f-calpro.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
The random forest models were fitted on a random subset of 80% of the data, of which the less severe
group was randomly down-sampled to have the same number of patients as the severe group. Parameter
settings were tuned using three times ten-fold cross validation. The final model evaluation was based on
the remaining 20% validation data. The performance of the models was reported as the area under the
receiver operating curves (ROC-AUC).
Ethical approval
The PREDICT-NBS cohort was approved by the Research Ethical Committee of the Capital Region of
Denmark (H-20048987) and no direct consent was required. The NorDIBD cohort was approved by the
Research Ethical Committee of the North Denmark Region (N-20170005-N-20200071). Oral and written
consents were obtained, and we followed up on whether any participant withdrew their consent.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569

## Results

We included 8179 patients with IBD (3688 (45%) patients with CD and 4491 (55%) with UC) and 9469
control individuals (Table 1). Among patients with CD, the mean age at diagnosis was 21·7 years (SD=7·4),
56% were female, and 1165 patients (31·6%) had a severe disease course based on three years of follow-up.
Among patients with UC, the mean age at diagnosis was 23·3 years (SD=8·4), 53% were female, and 1203
patients (26·8%) had a severe disease course. Control individuals had a mean normalized PGS of -0.221 for
CD PGS and -0.235 for UC PGS. Patients with CD had a mean normalized CD PGS of 0.528, whereas patients
with UC had a mean normalized UC PGS of 0.469.
Higher genetic burden of IBD susceptibility is associated with a more severe disease course
The PGS of IBD susceptibility was significantly associated with severe versus less severe disease for both CD
and UC (Figure 1A-B). Patients with severe CD had higher PGS than the remaining patients with CD (odds
ratio [OR]=1·26, 95% confidence interval [CI] =1·17-1·35 per SD increase). Accordingly, 39·3% of CD patients
in the highest PGS quintile experienced a severe disease course compared to 23·6% of CD patients in the
lowest PGS quintile. This was also the case for patients with UC (OR=1·35, 95% CI=1·26-1·45 per SD
increase), where 34·7% of patients in the highest PGS quintile experienced a severe disease course
compared to 20·1% in the lowest PGS quintile.
We investigated the association between susceptibility PGS and the secondary severity outcomes within the
follow-up period: two or more IBD-related hospitalizations exceeding two days, total hospitalization days,
two or more IBD-related major surgeries, one or more IBD-related major surgeries, a total use of at least
5000 mg systemic corticosteroids, treatment with biologics, treatment with immunomodulators,
occurrences of other IMIDs, and age at IBD onset (Figure 1C-D). In general, we observe that all individual
components of the main outcome were associated with susceptibility PGS with a consistent effect size
ranging from 1·24-1·50 and with overlapping CIs.
The most significant association between susceptibility PGS and CD severity was detected for treatment
with immunomodulators (OR=1·47, 95% CI=1·36-1·58 per SD increase), treatment with biologic therapies
(OR=1·35, 95% CI=1·25-1·45 per SD increase) and need for major surgery (OR=1·49, 95% CI=1·35-1·65 per
SD increase). CD PGS was further associated with having at least two hospitalization events, a higher
number of hospitalization days, use of at least 5000 mg of systemic corticosteroids, and with younger age at
diagnosis.
The most significant association between susceptibility PGS and UC severity was detected for having at least
two separate hospitalization events (OR=1·43, 95% CI=1·31-1·56 per SD increase) and for more days in
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
hospital (β=1·68, 95% CI=1·26-2·09 days of hospitalization per SD increase). UC PGS further associated with
need for treatment with biologic therapies and immunomodulators, use of at least 5000 mg of systemic
corticosteroids, and with the need of major surgery.
Extending beyond three years of follow-up
Separating the CD and UC cohorts into quintiles based on susceptibility PGS revealed cumulative incidence
curves ranking based on their PGS quintile, where the quintile with lowest PGS had the longest event-free
time (Figure 2). This pattern was consistent for both time to hospitalization and time to major surgery for
both CD and UC. Comparing the highest PGS quintile to the lowest revealed a quicker time to hospitalization
(CD: hazard ratio [HR]=1·81, 95% CI=1·57-2·09, UC: HR=1·69, 95% CI=1·47-1·95) and to major surgery (CD:
HR=2·74, 95% CI=2·18-3·45, UC: HR=2·04, 95% CI=1·55-2·69).
Biochemistry profile is affected by susceptibility genetics
Increased susceptibility PGS was associated with disease activity markers of gastrointestinal and systemic
inflammation (Figure 3). At diagnosis, f-calpro was increased (CD: β=0·32, 95% CI=0·23-0·42 mg/kg per SD
increase, UC: β=0·23, 95% CI=0·14-0·33 mg/kg per SD increase) and hemoglobin decreased (CD: β=-0·11,
95% CI=-0·16--0·07 mmol/L per SD increase, UC: β=-0·08, 95% CI=-0·12--0·03 mmol/L per SD increase) with
higher PGS, whereas CRP was only increased with higher PGS for patients with CD (β=0·17, 95% CI=0·10-
0·24 mg/L per SD increase). For patients with CD, increased f-calpro levels remained significantly associated
with higher PGS in the post-diagnosis phase (β=0·25, 95% CI=0·18-0·33 mg/kg per SD increase), whereas for
patients with UC, decreased hemoglobin levels remained significant (β=-0·04, 95% CI=-0·07--0·01 mmol/L
per SD increase).
Predicting IBD severity at the time of diagnosis
We constructed random forest models to separate severe and less severe disease courses of patients
diagnosed with IBD using information available at time of diagnosis (Figure 4). The down-sampled, balanced
dataset consisted of 367 severe and non-severe patients with CD and 440 severe and non-severe patients
with UC with information on all predictors. The AUC of the full models on the test data were 0·651 and
0·752 for CD and UC respectively. Susceptibility PGS ranked as the most important predictor of CD severity
and second most important predictor in UC severity. Adding CRP and f-calpro values at time of diagnosis
diminished the effect of PGS and ranked to be the most important predictors of both CD and UC severity.
Explicitly modelling HLA-DRB1*01:0318 that is associated with both susceptibility to IBD and severity of UC
did not increase the performance of the model in UC (AUC=0·726).
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569

## Discussion

In this unique, population-wide study of >8000 patients with available GWAS data and long-term follow-up,
we investigated the influence of IBD susceptibility genetics on the course of IBD using known susceptibility
PGS for IBD and a range of longitudinal severity outcomes within the first three years, including
hospitalizations, major surgeries, medication use, and test results from biochemistry laboratory tests.
We found an association between the aggregated genetic susceptibility to CD and UC and disease severity
over time. In patients with CD, the susceptibility PGS associated most strongly with undergoing major
surgery and needing treatment with biologics or immunomodulators. In patients with UC, the susceptibility
PGS associated strongly with more frequent and longer hospitalizations, as well as with a need for systemic
corticosteroids, immunomodulators, and biologics.
When splitting time to hospitalization and major surgery by PGS quintiles and introducing follow-up beyond
three years, we observed an additive pattern for both CD and UC, where a higher genetic susceptibility to
CD and UC associated with a proportionally higher hazard of hospitalization and major surgery.
Using longitudinal nationwide data from biochemistry laboratory tests, we further showed that the IBD
susceptibility PGS is associated with more gastrointestinal inflammation in the form of higher values of f-
calpro at time of diagnosis of both CD and UC and during follow-up in CD.  Furthermore, susceptibility PGS
associated with lower hemoglobin at diagnosis of CD and UC and during follow-up in UC, which is part of
the diagnostic criteria for acute severe UC21.
Our prediction models of IBD severity showed that CRP and f-calpro at time of diagnosis were the most
predictive markers for future severe disease and that adding susceptibility PGS did not improve predictive
power. The performance of future prediction models could potentially be improved by the creation of a
future IBD “severity PGS” based on genetics studies of IBD disease course.
Complementing the findings from Lee et al.7 and Cleynen et al.9, our results suggest that IBD susceptibility
genetics only explain part of the severity of IBD, hence leaving room for other factors at play. These should
be investigated together with genetics and included in future prognostic prediction models. This
observation is promising, as it points towards the possibility for modulating the effects of genetic
susceptibility through lifestyle interventions directed towards potential environmental factors that are yet
to be uncovered. Future prediction models of IBD severity may also include the gut microbiota profile22 and
additional biochemistry measurements to CRP and f-calpro.23 The present study is hopefully a step towards
the development of algorithms based on genetics, environmental exposures, and molecular pathways
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
which in the future can identify patients in need of increased monitoring and intensified treatment to
prevent their disease from progressing and improving their quality of life.
The primary strength of this study is its nationwide character and unselected nature, which assures
generalizability of findings, as well as the complete longitudinal follow-up of patients. Identifying IBD
patients using the Danish registries has previously been validated with a positive predictive value of 95%24
and completeness of 75-94%.24,25 A further strength is the use of unique population-based samples for
genetic analyses, which was combined with lifetime health data.
Our study also has potential limitations, which need to be considered. The cohort is rather young, and our
results may primarily reflect the course of IBD in this part of the patient population. Also, we did not have
nationwide data on disease extent and behavior to study if the genetic burden of susceptibility modulates
disease severity through these factors.9 However, the linearity of the association (especially for UC)
between the different susceptibility PGS quintiles and hospitalization and surgery risk suggests that the
effect is not limited to disease types that require more surgical interventions (ileal CD, extensive UC)
suggesting that the effect is driven by other factors also. We used comparable definitions of severe disease
for CD and UC which may be debated which is why we performed additional sensitivity analysis that
demonstrated the consistency of the association. Laboratory analyses were not available for all patients and
their availability may potentially reflect severity. However, no study has to our knowledge been able to test
all these parameters over time in a cohort where genetics were also available.

## Conclusion

This study presents novel evidence of an association between the genetic susceptibility burden and
subsequent severity of IBD over time. Patients with a higher susceptibility PGS experience more
hospitalizations, surgeries and medical treatments, suggesting that genetics of disease susceptibility and
disease severity are not orthogonal. Our findings of a dose-response relationship between the genetic
burden of IBD susceptibility and disease severity provide a new biological understanding of disease severity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
Acknowledgements
We thank the nurses at the outpatient clinic at the Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology at
Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark, for their important contribution to the sample collection.
Declaration of interests
TJ reports consultancy for Ferring and Pfizer. LL reports speaker fee from Takeda and advisory board for
Tillotts. HAJ reports speaker fee for Tillotts. The remaining authors have no disclosures.
Data sharing statement
This work uses data from the Danish National Health registries (https://sundhedsdatastyrelsen.dk), which is
protected by the Danish Act on Processing of Personal Data. To access the data an application is required,
which must be approved from the Danish Data Protection Agency and the Danish Health Data Authority.
Handling of the data must be carried out by a Danish institution.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
References
Ng SC, Shi HY, Hamidi N, et al. Worldwide incidence and prevalence of inflammatory bowel disease in
the 21st century: a systematic review of population-based studies. Lancet 2017; 390: 2769–78.
Agrawal M, Christensen HS, Bøgsted M, Colombel J-F, Jess T, Allin KH. The Rising Burden of
Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Denmark Over Two Decades: A Nationwide Cohort Study.
Gastroenterology 2022; 163: 1547-1554.e5.
Torres J, Mehandru S, Colombel JF, Peyrin-Biroulet L. Crohn’s disease. The Lancet 2017; 389: 1741–
Ungaro R, Mehandru S, Allen PB, Peyrin-Biroulet L, Colombel JF. Ulcerative colitis. The Lancet 2017;
389: 1756–70.
Liu Z, Liu R, Gao H, et al. Genetic architecture of the inflammatory bowel diseases across East Asian
and European ancestries. Nat Genet 2023; 55: 796–806.
Fachal L, Consortium on behalf of the IIG. OP08 Multi-ancestry genome-wide association study of
inflammatory bowel disease identifies 125 novel loci and directly implicates new genes in disease
susceptibility. J Crohns Colitis 2024; 18: i14–5.
Lee JC, Biasci D, Roberts R, et al. Genome-wide association study identifies distinct genetic
contributions to prognosis and susceptibility in Crohn’s disease. Nature Genetics 2017 49:2 2017; 49:
262–8.
Khera A V., Chaffin M, Aragam KG, et al. Genome-wide polygenic scores for common diseases
identify individuals with risk equivalent to monogenic mutations. Nat Genet 2018; 50: 1219.
Cleynen I, Boucher G, Jostins L, et al. Inherited determinants of Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis
phenotypes: A genetic association study. The Lancet 2016; 387: 156–67.
Karmi N, Bangma A, Spekhorst LM, et al. Polygenetic risk scores do not add predictive power to
clinical models for response to anti-TNFα therapy in inflammatory bowel disease. PLoS One 2021; 16.
DOI:10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0256860.
Serra EG, Schwerd T, Moutsianas L, et al. Somatic mosaicism and common genetic variation
contribute to the risk of very-early-onset inflammatory bowel disease. Nature Communications 2020
11:1 2020; 11: 1–15.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
Schmidt M, Pedersen L, Sørensen HT. The Danish Civil Registration System as a tool in epidemiology.
Eur J Epidemiol 2014; 29: 541–9.
Schmidt M, Schmidt SAJ, Sandegaard JL, Ehrenstein V, Pedersen L, Sørensen HT. The Danish National
Patient Registry: a review of content, data quality, and research potential. Clin Epidemiol 2015; 7:
449.
Pottegård A, Schmidt SAJ, Wallach-Kildemoes H, Sørensen HT, Hallas J, Schmidt M. Data Resource
Profile: The Danish National Prescription Registry. Int J Epidemiol 2017; 46: 798–798f.
Arendt JFH, Hansen AT, Ladefoged SA, Sørensen HT, Pedersen L, Adelborg K. Existing Data Sources in
Clinical Epidemiology: Laboratory Information System Databases in Denmark. Clin Epidemiol 2020;
12: 469–75.
Nørgaard-Pedersen B, Hougaard DM. Storage policies and use of the Danish Newborn Screening
Biobank. J Inherit Metab Dis 2007; 30: 530–6.
Larsen L, Karachalia Sandri A, Fallingborg J, et al. Has the Incidence of Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Peaked? Evidence From the Population-Based NorDIBD Cohort 1978-2020. Am J Gastroenterol 2023;
118: 501–10.
Vestergaard MV, Nøhr AK, Allin KH, et al. HLA-DRB1*01:03 and Severe Ulcerative Colitis. JAMA 2024;
published online Oct 15. DOI:10.1001/JAMA.2024.20429.
Middha P, Thummalapalli R, Betti MJ, et al. Polygenic risk score for ulcerative colitis predicts immune
checkpoint inhibitor-mediated colitis. Nature Communications 2024 15:1 2024; 15: 1–10.
De Lange KM, Moutsianas L, Lee JC, et al. Genome-wide association study implicates immune
activation of multiple integrin genes in inflammatory bowel disease. Nat Genet 2017; 49: 256.
Kedia S, Ahuja V, Tandon R. Management of acute severe ulcerative colitis. World J Gastrointest
Pathophysiol 2014; 5: 579.
Buffet-Bataillon S, Bouguen G, Fleury F, Cattoir V, Le Cunff Y. Gut microbiota analysis for prediction of
clinical relapse in Crohn’s disease. Scientific Reports 2022 12:1 2022; 12: 1–8.
Vestergaard MV, Allin KH, Poulsen GJ, Lee JC, Jess T. Characterizing the pre-clinical phase of
inflammatory bowel disease. Cell Rep Med 2023; 4: 101263.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
Jacobsen HA, Jess T, Larsen L. Validity of Inflammatory Bowel Disease Diagnoses in the Danish
National Patient Registry: A Population-Based Study from the North Denmark Region. Clin Epidemiol
2022; 14: 1099–109.
Fonager K, Toft Sørensen H, Nørby Rasmussen S, Møller-Petersen J, Vyberg M. Assessment of the
diagnoses of Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis in a Danish hospital information system. Scand J
Gastroenterol 1996; 31: 154–9.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
Tables and figures
Table 1: Baseline characteristics of study population.  Numbers (percentage) are reported in the table.
N = 8179 (100)
The PREDICT-NBS cohort
N = 7493 (91.6)
The NorDIBD cohort
N = 686 (8.4)
3688 (45.1)
4491 (54.9)
3340 (44.6)
4153 (55.4)
348 (50.7)
338 (49.3)
Sex^
Female^
2056 (55.7)
2400 (53.4)
1875 (56.1)
2211 (53.2)
181 (52.0)
189 (55.9)
Male^
1632 (44.3)  2091 (46.6)
1465 (43.9)  1942 (46.8)
167 (48.0)
149 (44.1)
Age at diagnosis
<17^years
822 (22.3)
772 (17.2)
783 (23.4)
754 (18.2)
39 (11.2)
18 (5.3)
17-40^years
2790 (75.7)
3580 (79.7)
2557 (76.6)
3399 (81.8)
233 (67.0)
181 (53.6)
≥40^years
76 (2.1)
139 (3.1)
76 (21.8)
139 (41.1)
Calendar year at diagnosis^
1996-2005^
534 (14.5)
576 (12.8)
433 (13.0)
488 (11.8)
101 (29.0)
88 (26.0)
2005-2015^
1936 (52.5)
2470 (55.0)
1783 (53.4)
2308 (55.6)
153 (44.0)
162 (47.9)
2015-2020^
1218 (33.0)
1445 (32.2)
1124 (33.7)
1357 (32.7)
94 (27.0)
88 (26.0)
CD: Crohn’s disease, UC: ulcerative colitis, PREDICT-NBS: PREDICT neonatal blood spots, NorDIBD: North
Danmark inflammatory bowel disease
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
Figure 1: Susceptibility PGS related to IBD severity. A) Violin plot of PGS values of CD susceptibility
(normalized to SDs from the mean) for controls and CD severity groups. Summary statistics are outputted
from logistic regressions. B) Violin plot of PGS values of UC susceptibility (normalized to SDs from the mean)
for controls and UC severity groups. Summary statistics are outputted from logistic regressions. We
analyzed the association between the PGS of susceptibility for developing CD and UC and ten different
severity outcomes. Binary outcomes C) were analyzed using logistic regression and the OR (±95% CI) per SD
increase in PGS is shown for CD and UC patients separately. Numerical outcomes D) were analyzed using
linear regression and the β estimates (±95% CI) per SD increase in PGS are shown for CD and UC patients
separately. P-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Bonferroni correction for ten tests.
CD: Crohn’s disease, UC: ulcerative colitis, IBD: inflammatory bowel disease, OR: odds ratio, PGS: polygenic
score, SD: standard deviation, IMID: immune-mediated inflammatory disease, CI: confidence interval
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
Figure 2: Time to severity event split by PGS quintiles. A) Cumulative incidence of IBD-related
hospitalization split by CD susceptibility PGS quintiles within the CD cohort. B) Cumulative incidence of IBD-
related major surgery split by CD susceptibility PGS quintiles within the CD cohort. C) Cumulative incidence
of IBD-related hospitalization split by UC susceptibility PGS quintiles within the UC cohort. D) Cumulative
incidence of IBD-related major surgery split by UC susceptibility PGS quintiles within the UC cohort.
IBD: Inflammatory bowel disease, UC: ulcerative colitis, CD: Crohn’s disease, PGS: polygenic score, Q1-Q5:
Quintiles 1 to 5, where Q1 has the lowest quintile of PGS scores, and Q5 the highest.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
Figure 3: Association between susceptibility PGS and laboratory biochemical test results at different time
points. Plot showing β estimates and their 95% CI for association between laboratory test results (CRP, f-
calpro, and hemoglobin) and SD standardized susceptibility PGS for CD and UC separately. For each
individual, the test results were calculated as following: Diagnosis = test result closest to date of diagnosis
(±six months), and post-diagnosis = the median value of all tests from six months to three years after date
of diagnosis. Back-transformed estimates and 95% CIs are showed. P-values were adjusted for multiple
testing using the Bonferroni correction for three tests. The dots are shaped based on significance after
adjusting for multiple testing. Dot sizes are based on number of individuals with available test results in that
given period.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
CD: Crohn’s disease, UC: ulcerative colitis, PGS: polygenic score, SD: standard deviation, CRP: C-reactive
protein, f-calpro: fecal calprotectin, CI: confidence interval, NS: not significant
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569

## Figure 4: Results of IBD severity prediction models. Random forest models were fitted using patient

information available at date of diagnosis as predicters. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for
the performance on a test dataset is shown for A) CD and B) UC. C) Variable importance for predicting IBD
severity is shown based on ranking by decreasing mean decrease in Gini index.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569
CD: Crohn’s disease, UC: ulcerative colitis, IBD: inflammatory bowel disease, PGS: polygenic score, IMID:
immune-mediated inflammatory disease, CRP: C-reactive protein, f-calpro: fecal calprotectin, TPR: true
positive rate, FPR: false positive rate
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted November 2, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.01.24316569