# Small RNA-mediated genomic silencing promotes telomere stability in the absence of telomerase in C. elegans
**Authors:** Longtine, C.; Frenk, S.; Lister-Shimauchi, E. H.; Ahmed, S.
**DOI:** 10.1101/292722 | **Published:** 2025-05-15 | **Version:** 4
**Subject:** Neuroscience Studies | **Category:** genetics | **Method:** API

**PDF URL:** https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/292722.full.pdf
**Web URL:** https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/292722v4

## Abstract
We define an endogenous small RNA pathway in Caenorhabditis elegans that protects telomeres via Dicer, the perinuclear Argonaute protein WAGO-1, the nuclear Argonaute protein HRDE-1, and the HP1 protein HPL-2 that stabilizes the heterochromatin mark H3K9me2. Loss of telomerase induces biogenesis of subtelomeric small RNAs, whereas loss of both telomerase and small RNA-mediated genome silencing induces expression of the telomeric lncRNA TERRA, DNA damage, and accelerated sterility. These phenotypes were rescued by exogenous telomeric small RNAs and by loss of the DNA damage response protein EXO-1. Although ATRX promotes heterochromatin deposition and is lost in human tumors that maintain their telomeres via ALT, we detected only a modest role for the C. elegans ATRX ortholog XNP-1 in telomere protection in the absence of telomerase. Moreover, neither XNP-1 nor small RNA factors that promote telomere stability in the absence of telomerase repress ALT in C. elegans. We propose that small RNA-mediated heterochromatin formation and telomerase function redundantly to repress a form of telomeric DNA damage that induces TERRA expression. We conclude that small RNA-mediated genome silencing promotes telomere stability in the absence of telomerase.

Article SummaryWe found that a number of small RNA biogenesis factors and heterochromatin proteins promoted telomere stability in the absence of telomerase. The telomeric non-coding RNA TERRA and DNA damage signaling were induced upon loss of small RNAs and telomerase, indicating that small RNAs directly or indirectly repress TERRA expression and telomeric DNA damage, both of which were suppressed when telomerase acts to heal telomeric damage. These findings reveal a functional interaction between small RNAs and telomere biology that is relevant to the fields of aging, genome stability and small RNAs.

## Content
Title:
Small RNA-mediated genomic silencing promotes
telomere stability in the absence of telomerase in C.
elegans
Authors:
Charlie Longtine1,2,#, Stephen Frenk1,2,#, Evan H. Lister-Shimauchi1,2, and Shawn
Ahmed1,2,3*
Affiliations:
1Department of Genetics, 2Department of Biology, 3Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
# Equal contributions
*Correspondence: shawn@med.unc.edu
Running title: small RNAs promote telomere stability
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
Keywords: telomere, telomerase, siRNA, sRNA, RNA interference

## Abstract

We define an endogenous small RNA pathway in Caenorhabditis elegans that protects
telomeres via Dicer, the perinuclear Argonaute protein WAGO-1, the nuclear Argonaute
protein HRDE-1, and the HP1 protein HPL-2 that stabilizes the heterochromatin mark
H3K9me2. Loss of telomerase induces biogenesis of subtelomeric small RNAs,
whereas loss of both telomerase and small RNA-mediated genome silencing induces
expression of the telomeric lncRNA TERRA, DNA damage, and accelerated sterility.
These phenotypes were rescued by exogenous telomeric small RNAs and by loss of the
DNA damage response protein EXO-1. Although ATRX promotes heterochromatin
deposition and is lost in human tumors that maintain their telomeres via ALT, we
detected only a modest role for the C. elegans ATRX ortholog XNP-1 in telomere
protection in the absence of telomerase. Moreover, neither XNP-1 nor small RNA
factors that promote telomere stability in the absence of telomerase repress ALT in C.
elegans. We propose that small RNA-mediated heterochromatin formation and
telomerase function redundantly to repress a form of telomeric DNA damage that
induces TERRA expression. We conclude that small RNA-mediated genome silencing
promotes telomere stability in the absence of telomerase.
Article Summary
We found that a number of small RNA biogenesis factors and heterochromatin proteins
promoted telomere stability in the absence of telomerase. The telomeric non-coding
RNA TERRA and DNA damage signaling were induced upon loss of small RNAs and
telomerase, indicating that small RNAs directly or indirectly repress TERRA expression
and telomeric DNA damage, both of which were suppressed when telomerase acts to
heal telomeric damage. These findings reveal a functional interaction between small
RNAs and telomere biology that is relevant to the fields of aging, genome stability and
small RNAs.

## Introduction

certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
Telomeres are repetitive nucleoprotein structures that protect the ends of linear
eukaryotic chromosomes from degradation and recognition as double-stranded DNA
breaks (Maciejowski and de Lange, 2017, Shay, 2016). Deficiency for telomerase

## reverse transcriptase in most human somatic cells results in progressive telomere

erosion over cell divisions, which eventually triggers replicative senescence (Holohan et
al., 2014, Shay, 2016). This telomere clock acts as a barrier to tumorigenesis, but may
also contribute to organismal aging through impaired stem cell function, regeneration,
and organ maintenance (Donate and Blasco, 2011, Shay, 2016). Regulating the rate of
telomere erosion in telomerase-negative cells is therefore crucial for maintaining the
balance between tumor suppression and age-related tissue decline (Li et al., 2017,
Maciejowski and de Lange, 2017). Tumor cells escape telomere-triggered senescence
by stabilizing telomere length, either through reactivation of telomerase or through
activation of the telomerase-independent recombination-mediated telomere
maintenance pathway termed Alternative Lengthening of Telomeres (ALT) (Pickett and
Reddel, 2015).
Telomeres have features characteristic of heterochromatin in that they associate with
the heterochromatin protein HP1 and contain transcriptionally repressive histone marks
such as methylation of H3K9 and H4K20 (Benetti et al., 2007, McMurchy et al., 2017).
Nonetheless, telomeres are transcribed into the G-rich long noncoding RNA (lncRNA)
termed TERRA, a feature widely conserved among eukaryotes (Azzalin et al., 2007).
TERRA is transcribed from the subtelomere into the telomere by RNA polymerase II
and is upregulated at shortened and damaged telomeres, where it may recruit
telomerase and chromatin modifiers to promote telomere elongation (Azzalin and
Lingner, 2015, Cusanelli et al., 2013). Telomere elongation represses expression of
TERRA through increased heterochromatin marks at telomeres such as histone H3K9
methylation and HP1 binding (Arnoult et al., 2012). In contrast, shortened telomeres of
mice deficient for telomerase or of mouse cells that overexpress the telomere-binding
protein TRF2 display loss of heterochromatic marks at telomeres and subtelomeres
(Benetti et al., 2007, Benetti et al., 2008). Telomere length has therefore been inversely
correlated with TERRA expression and the heterochromatic state of telomeres, and
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
TERRA expression in mouse cells has recently been linked to H3K9me3 and other
heterochromatic histone marks present at mammalian telomeres (Montero et al., 2018).
Transcriptional silencing and heterochromatin deposition at repetitive segments of the
genome such as the pericentromere require long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) transcripts
that promote biogenesis of and interact with small RNAs (sRNAs) that direct
heterochromatin factors to target these genomic loci (Holoch and Moazed, 2015,
Reinhart and Bartel, 2002). Endogenous sources of double-stranded RNA such as
sense-antisense transcript hybrids can be processed into small RNAs that play roles in
creating and maintaining sRNA-mediated heterochromatin. In this context, RNA
expression is paradoxically required for genomic silencing (Holoch and Moazed, 2015).
Bidirectional transcription of telomeres has been linked to production of telomeric
sRNAs that are associated with the presence of subtelomeric DNA methylation in
Arabidopsis (Vrbsky et al., 2010). Similar telomeric sRNAs have also been observed in
Tetrahymena, mouse stem cells, and human cell lines (Cao et al., 2009, Couvillion et
al., 2009, Rossiello et al., 2017), and can promote the DNA damage response at
uncapped telomeres in mammals (Cao et al., 2009, Couvillion et al., 2009, Rossiello et
al., 2017). However, their functional relevance at canonical telomeres and their
interaction with telomerase is not well understood.
Germline transcription in C. elegans is regulated in part by a network of small RNA
pathways that promote silencing or expression of target loci in a sequence-specific
manner (Billi et al., 2014). Primary sRNA classes trigger production of secondary
sRNAs that can promote transcriptional silencing or mRNA destruction. One class of
primary sRNAs are 21 nucleotide Piwi-Interacting RNAs (piRNAs) that are created from
thousands of tiny genes that repress expression of potentially harmful foreign genetic
elements including transposons and transgenes (Batista et al., 2008, Das et al., 2008,
Kasper et al., 2014). piRNAs interact with PRG-1, a member of the Piwi clade of
Argonaute proteins, which can recognize piRNA targets based on sequence
complementarity with up to 3 mismatches (Bagijn et al., 2012). RNA target recognition
triggers the recruitment of RNA-dependent RNA polymerases (RdRPs) that act in
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
Mutator bodies, which are associated with perinuclear P granules, to create de novo 22
nucleotide secondary sRNAs with a 5’ guanine (22G RNAs) (Pak and Fire, 2007).
These 22G RNAs are loaded onto worm-specific Argonaute proteins (WAGOs) such as
the nuclear WAGO HRDE-1, which promotes heterochromatin deposition at target loci
(Ashe et al., 2012, Buckley et al., 2012). Germline transcription is protected by a
separate set of 22G RNAs that interact with the anti-silencing Argonaute protein CSR-1
(Avgousti et al., 2012, Wedeles et al., 2013). Aside from the piRNA pathway, 22G RNAs
can be created in response to primary sRNAs derived from other sources. For example,
DCR-1, the C. elegans homologue of the highly conserved RNAse class III enzyme
Dicer, can cleave endogenous double stranded RNA to create primary 26G RNAs,
which bind distinct Argonaute proteins to trigger RDRP-dependent silencing through the
22G RNA pathway described above (Bernstein et al., 2001, Ketting et al., 2001, Knight
and Bass, 2001).
Here we describe an endogenous sRNA and heterochromatin pathway that functions
redundantly with telomerase to repress TERRA and promote telomere stability.

## Materials and Methods

Strains: Unless otherwise noted, all strains were maintained at 20°C on nematode
growth medium plates seeded with Escherichia coli OP50. Strains used include Bristol
N2 ancestral, wago-1(tm1414), trt-1(ok410), unc-29(e193), dpy-5(e61), dcr-1(mg375),
hrde-1(tm1200), rde-1(ne219), rde-4(ne299), rrf-3(mg373), rrf-2(ok210), eri-1(mg366),
mut-7(pk204), mut-7(pk720), mut-14(pk738), rbr-2(tm1231), spr-5(by101), xnp-
1(ok1823), xnp-1(tm678), hpl-1(tm1624), hpl-2(ok916), hpl-2(tm1479), and exo-
1(tm1842). A trt-1 unc-29 double mutant, where unc-29 is tightly linked to trt-1, was
used to create strains used in this study. Double, triple, and quadruple mutants were
created using standard marker mutations and verified based on phenotype or genotype.
mut-7 and mut-14 mutants are known to accumulate transposon-induced mutations, so
these strains were outcrossed several times before use.
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
DAPI staining: One-day-old adults were washed twice in M9, soaked in 150 µL of
400ng/mL DAPI in ethanol solution for 30 min or until evaporated, rehydrated in 2 mL of
M9 solution overnight at 4°C, and mounted in 8 µL VECTASHIELD mounting medium
(Vector Laboratories). Chromosome counts were performed under 60x magnification
and a 359nm excitation wavelength using a Nikon Eclipse E800 microscope.
qPCR: Non-starved mixed-stage worms were washed with M9 and RNA was extracted

## using 1 mL TRIZOL according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For RT-PCR analysis,

total RNA was treated twice with DNase I and was reverse transcribed with primers for
a reference gene act-1 and a telomere-specific primer (GCCTAA)3 using SuperScript II
reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). For SYBR green reactions, subtelomere specific
primers were designed within 200bp of the telomere-subtelomere junction.
RNA FISH: RNA FISH was performed as previously described (Sakaguchi et al., 2014)
with several modifications. In brief, non-starved, mixed-stage animals were washed
twice in M9 and three times in 1x DEPC-treated PBS. Worms were fixed in 1mL fixation
buffer (1x DEPC-treated PBS with 3.7% formaldehyde) for 45 min rotating at room
temperature then washed twice in 1mL 1x DEPC-treated PBS. Fixed animals were
permeabilized overnight at 4°C in 70% ethanol in DEPC-treated H2O, then washed in 1
mL wash buffer [10% (vol/vol) formamide in 2x RNases-free SSC]. Aliquots of each
sample were removed prior to hybridization and treated with RNaseA for 1h at 37°C to
ensure probe specificity to RNA. Hybridization was performed at 30°C overnight in 100
µL hybridization buffer (10% dextran sulfate, 2x RNase-free SSC, 10% deionized
formamide, 0.02% RNase-free BSA, 50 µg E. coli tRNA) with 1.25 µM probe. Cy5-
labelled (GCCTAA)3 probe was used to detect TERRA transcripts. Animals were
washed twice with wash buffer, counterstained with 25 ng/mL DAPI for 30 min at room
temperature, and mounted on glass slides in VECTASHIELD mounting medium (Vector
Laboratories) before epifluorescence microscopy.
IF: IF was carried out as previously described (Phillips et al., 2009) by fixing dissected
gonads of 1 day old adults in 2% PFA for 10 minutes followed by a 1 minute postfixation
in methanol. Rabbit anti-pS/TQ (Cell Signaling Technology) was used at a 1:500 dilution
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
and mouse anti-RNA:DNA hybrid S9.6 at 1:500 dilution. Stained gonads were
counterstained with DAPI and mounted with VECTASHIELD (Vector laboratories)
before epifluorescence microscopy.
RNAi: RNAi clone expressing dsRNA targeting C. elegans telomeres was constructed
using NEB HiFi DNA assembly mix according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 200
bp of telomeric repeats were amplified from cTel55x by PCR with 20 bp overlap to SpeI
digested L4440. Correct constructs were transformed into HT115 and RNAi was
performed as previously described (McMurchy et al., 2017).
Southern Blot: C. elegans genomic DNA was digested overnight with Hinf1 (New
England Biolabs), separated on a 0.8% agarose gel at 1.5 V/cm, and transferred to a
neutral nylon membrane (Hybond-N, GE Healthcare Life Sciences). A digoxigenin-
labelled telomere probe was hybridized and detected as described (Ahmed and
Hodgkin, 2000). Migration distance was measured using ImageJ.
Mrt and ALT assays: When telomerase-deficient trt-1(ok410) C. elegans mutants are
passaged by using the standard Mortal Germline (Mrt) assay developed in our
laboratory, which involves passaging six L1 larval animals to fresh plates weekly, 100%
become sterile within 20–30 generations. When trt-1(ok410) strains are passaged
weekly by transferring a 1cm2 chunk of agar populated with ≈200–400 animals, 10-20%

## of the strains survive for hundreds of generations. Mantel-Cox Log Rank Analysis was

used to determine differences of transgenerational lifespan between strains. A z-test
was performed to compare proportion of ALT survivors in chunked strains.
RNA-seq: Animals were grown at 20°C on 100 mm NGM plates seeded with OP50
bacteria. Two biological replicates were prepared for each genotype. RNA was
extracted using Trizol (Ambion) followed by isopropanol precipitation. RNA samples
were treated with 20U RNA 5’ polyphosphatase (Lucigen, RP8092H) for 30 minutes at
37°C to remove 5’ triphosphate groups. Library preparation and sequencing was
performed at the UNC School of Medicine High-Throughput Sequencing Facility
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
(HTSF). RNA-seq libraries were prepared using the NEXTflex Small RNA Library Prep
Kit for Illumina (Bio Scientific). Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 to
produce approximately twenty million 50 bp single-end reads per library.

## Analysis of high throughput sequencing data: Adapter trimming was performed as

required using the bbduk.sh script from the bbmap suite3 and custom scripts (Bushnell,
2016). Reads were then filtered for 22G species or all species between 18 and 30
nucleotides in length using a custom python script. Reads were then converted to fasta
format and mapped to the C. elegans genome (WS251) using bowtie (Langmead et al.,
2009) with the following options: -M 1 -v 0 -best -strata. Uniquely mapping sRNAs were
detected by replacing the -M 1 parameter with -m 1. To detect telomere-mapping
sRNAs, reads were mapped to seven repeats of perfect telomere sequence (TTAGGC),
allowing for zero mismatches. Unmapped reads were re-mapped to the telomere
sequence, this time allowing for one mismatch. This step was repeated to detect reads
that map to telomeres with two or three mismatches. Genes with differential sRNA
abundance in trt-1 were identified using DESeq2 (Love et al., 2014). To detect changes
in the abundance of subtelomeric sRNAs in trt-1 and trt-1; dcr-1, 22G reads mapping to
the 2kb of sequence adjacent to the telomere were counted for each chromosome arm.
Counts were normalized by dividing by the total number of mapped reads for each
library. A pseudocount of 1 was added to each normalized value to avoid division by
zero errors. Replicates were averaged and the log2-fold change between mutant and

## wildtype was calculated for each subtelomere. Analysis of sequencing data was

performed using the R statistical computing environment (Team, 2017). Genome
regions were visualized using the Gviz R package (Hahne and Ivanek, 2016).
Immunoprecipitation datasets were used in Figure 3G, H but were excluded from the

## analysis shown in Figure 3D-F. To detect sRNAs targeting transposons, 22G reads

were mapped to the C. elegans transposon consensus sequences downloaded from
Repbase with bowtie, allowing for up to two mismatches. ChIP-seq reads were mapped
to the genome as fastq files as described above without the size-filtering step. Read
coverage was calculated at each base using bedtools (Quinlan and Hall, 2010).
Coverage values were normalized by dividing by the number of total mapped reads for
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
each library and enrichment was calculated by dividing the normalized coverage for IP
libraries by the normalized coverage of their respective input libraries.

## Results

Loss of endogenous sRNAs or XNP-1/ATRX does not promote ALT
High levels of TERRA and loss of the histone H3.3 chaperone subunits ATRX and
DAXX commonly occur in human ALT cancers (Flynn et al., 2015, Lovejoy et al., 2012).
The ATRX/DAXX complex mediates histone H3.3 incorporation at telomeres and
interacts with methylated H3K9 and HP1 to promote heterochromatin formation (Wong
et al., 2010), which has been proposed to repress ALT by protecting telomeres from
replication stress and TERRA expression (Udugama et al., 2015). We have previously
shown that 10-20% of C. elegans strains that are deficient for telomerase can be
maintained indefinitely through the activation of ALT (Cheng et al., 2012). Because
human ALT cancers are characterized by ATRX-mediated heterochromatin dysfunction,
we reasoned that small RNA factors that promote heterochromatin silencing might
regulate the establishment of ALT. We tested this hypothesis by passaging trt-1
telomerase mutant strains that were deficient for biogenesis of either primary or
secondary sRNAs by transferring hundreds of worms per strain weekly, which reliably
allows survival of 10-20% of strains via ALT (Cheng et al., 2012). Loss of either primary
sRNAs (trt-1; dcr-1) or downstream secondary sRNAs (trt-1; mut-7 and trt-1; mut-14) did
not significantly alter the proportion of strains that survive via ALT (Figure 1A, Table
S1). Similarly, loss of the histone H3.3 chaperone XNP-1/ATRX itself did not affect the
establishment or maintenance of ALT (Table S1), indicating that loss of neither sRNA-
nor XNP-1/ATRX-mediated heterochromatin formation is sufficient to promote ALT in C.
elegans.
Small RNA and heterochromatin factors repress rapid sterility when telomerase is
deficient
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
C. elegans trt-1 telomerase mutant strains do not remain fertile via ALT when 6 worms
are passaged weekly. Instead, when 20-40 strains per genotype are passaged,

## telomere erosion and chromosome fusion results in uniform sterility after growth for 20-

30 generations (Ahmed and Hodgkin, 2000, Cheng et al., 2012, Meier et al., 2006). The
sterility of late-generation trt-1 mutants is analogous to crisis observed in checkpoint-
deficient telomerase-negative mammalian cells. Intriguingly, trt-1 mutant lines lacking
primary or secondary sRNA biogenesis factors became sterile significantly faster than
trt-1 single mutants when they were passaged by transferring 6 L1 larvae per week
(Figure 1B, Table S2). sRNA-deficient trt-1 mutant strains rapidly accumulated end-to-
end chromosome fusions by generation F12, a characteristic of telomerase mutants that
have grown for more than 20 generations (Figure 1G). C. elegans chromosome fusions
cause non-disjunction events during meiosis that elicit dominant embryonic lethality or
X0 male phenotypes in progeny of heterozygous F1 animals. We asked if early-
generation trt-1; dcr-1 mutant animals possessed chromosome fusions by performing
genetic crosses that would be capable of revealing a single heterozygous end-to-end
chromosome fusion (Ahmed and Hodgkin, 2000). We crossed four independently
derived trt-1 dcr-1 F4 hermaphrodites with N2 wild-type males but failed to detect fused
chromosomes that were present in generation F24 trt-1 mutant controls (p = 3.841e-05
for males and p = 3.61e-05 for dead embryos, Mann Whitney U test) (Table S3).
However, early-generation trt-1; dcr-1 mutant strains displayed high levels of DNA
damage that were not observed for trt-1 single mutant controls (Figure 1H). Together,

## these results suggest that loss of small RNAs and telomerase elicits telomere damage

but not telomere fusions in early generations. The rapid sterility of these strains in later
generations occurs in response to end-to-end chromosome fusions that arise from
critically shortened telomeres.
We created a number of sRNA-deficient trt-1 double mutants to define additional small
RNA factors that promote telomere stability in the absence of telomerase. The telomeric
sRNA pathway included RDE-4, which binds endogenous dsRNA and forms a complex
with the Dicer nuclease DCR-1, and the Argonaute RDE-1, which acts with the RNA-
dependent RNA polymerase RRF-3 to promote production of dsRNA-derived primary
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
sRNAs (Gent et al., 2010, Steiner et al., 2009, Tabara et al., 2002) (Figure 1B). The
MUTATOR proteins MUT-7 and MUT-14, which promote amplification of 22G
secondary sRNAs that can promote transcriptional silencing in the nucleus (Billi et al.,
2014, Ketting et al., 1999, Tijsterman et al., 2002), were also required to prevent rapid
sterility in trt-1 mutants (Figure 1B). Two other small RNA factors, RRF-2 and ERI-1,
did not affect trt-1 mutant sterility (Figure 1B), indicating that the endogenous 26G
sRNA pathway that requires ERI-1 (Gent et al., 2010, Han et al., 2009) is dispensable
for telomere stability in the absence of telomerase.
We crossed dcr-1 and mut-7 single mutants with wild-type males, singled F2 progeny
that were homozygous mutant for dcr-1 or mut-7, and isolated genomic DNA from F4,
F6 and F8 generation descendants. Southern blotting revealed discrete telomere bands
that display modest telomere erosion for freshly homozygous dcr-1 and mut-7 mutant
telomeres (Figure S1A, B), although none of the small RNA single mutants we tested
became progressively sterile or accumulated chromosome fusions (Figure 1G). We
asked if the accelerated sterility of small RNA-deficient trt-1 mutant strains might be
explained by short telomeres inherited from gametes derived from small RNA-deficient
grandparents using genetics, by crossing a trt-1; dcr-1 double mutant hermaphrodite
with dcr-1 mutant males, singling trt-1 +/-; dcr-1 -/- F1 hermaphrodites and isolating trt-
1; dcr-1 double mutant F2. This cross was repeated 15 times to create a trt-1; dcr-1
double mutant strain whose telomeres should be exclusively derived from the dcr-1

## mutant background. The trt-1; dcr-1 15x strain became sterile slightly slower than

freshly created trt-1; dcr-1 double mutants, although this difference was not statistically

## significant (p = 0.07) (Figure 1F). These results indicate that shortened telomeres

transmitted from the dcr-1 mutant cannot explain the rapid sterility of trt-1; dcr-1 double
mutants. We analyzed the dynamics of telomere erosion in sRNA-deficient trt-1 mutant

## strains using terminal restriction fragment analysis but did not observe a significant

difference in the rate of telomere erosion when passaging multiple worms per plate, in
comparison to trt-1 single mutant controls (p > 0.7 in both cases) (Figure S1A, B).
However, when we passaged individual worms for each genotype, we observed
significant levels of telomere instability in sRNA-deficient trt-1 mutant strains in
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
comparison to trt-1 single mutant controls. Southern blotting revealed that trt-1; mut-7
and trt-1; dcr-1 mutants had a significantly larger variance in the rate of telomere
erosion than trt-1 mutants, which resulted from atypical shortening and elongation
events (Figure S2A, B).
We hypothesized that small RNAs might repress rapid sterility by directing chromatin
factors to telomeres to promote deposition of heterochromatic marks. C. elegans
telomeres have previously been reported to be enriched for H3K9me2 and bound by the
HP1 homolog HPL-2, which promotes H3K9me2 deposition and heterochromatin
formation, but not by the other C. elegans HP1 homolog HPL-1, which interacts with
H3K9me3 (Canzio et al., 2014, McMurchy et al., 2017). We confirmed that H3K9me2
but not H3K9me3 was enriched at C. elegans telomeres using high throughput
sequencing data sets generated from chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
experiments performed by independent groups (McMurchy et al., 2017, Zeller et al.,
2016). Moreover, we observed small H3K9me2 domains that extended into the
subtelomere at all C. elegans chromosome ends (Figure 3A-C). Similar to primary and
secondary sRNA-deficient trt-1 strains, loss of HPL-2 but not HPL-1 caused accelerated
senescence in trt-1 mutants (Figure 1C). H3K4 methylation, which is associated with
regions of active transcription, must be removed by demethylases prior to deposition of
repressive H3K9 methylation (Greer et al., 2010, Li et al., 2008). We found that loss of
either of the two C. elegans H3K4 demethylases RBR-2/KDM5 or SPR-5/LSD1 caused
rapid sterility of trt-1 mutants (Figure 1C). Thus, H3K4 demethylation and H3K9me2
deposition prevent telomere instability in the absence of telomerase.
The histone remodeling protein XNP-1/ATRX has previously been implicated in
telomeric heterochromatin formation and interacts with unmethylated H3K4 and
methylated H3K9 deposited on the histone variant H3.3 (Udugama et al., 2015). trt-1
xnp-1 double mutants became sterile significantly faster than trt-1 single mutants but not
as fast as small RNA deficient trt-1; mut-7 double mutants (Figure 1D). As loss of both
xnp-1 and mut-7 did not exacerbate the accelerated sterility phenotype of sRNA-
deficient trt-1 mutant strains (Figure 1D), these genes function in the same telomere
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
stability pathway. This suggests that XNP-1 mediates some, but not all, of the small
RNA response to DNA damage at telomeres, possibly because sRNA-dependent
methylation of histones other than H3.3, such as canonical histone H3, can promote
telomere stability.
Increased expression of TERRA in small RNA and chromatin deficient trt-1 strains
We hypothesized that DCR-1 and RDE-4 may interact with telomeric dsRNA produced
from bidirectional transcription of telomeres or interstitial telomere sequences to create
primary sRNAs that are then amplified into a secondary sRNA population that triggers
small RNA-dependent silencing of TERRA (Rossiello et al., 2017, Vrbsky et al., 2010).
To test whether small RNA and chromatin factors regulate telomeric transcription we
measured the abundance of TERRA by qRT-PCR at three chromosome ends using
primers within their H3K9me2-coated subtelomere domains (Figure 3A-C). Compared
to trt-1 single mutant controls, TERRA was upregulated in early-generations in three
strains - trt-1; rde-4 and trt-1; mut-14 and trt-1; spr-5 double mutants - but not in trt-1 or

## sRNA-deficient single mutant controls (Figure 2A). These results are distinct from

previous observations that show that TERRA transcription can be specifically induced at
damaged or shortened telomeres of mammalian cells that possess telomerase (Porro et
al., 2014, Rossiello et al., 2017).
We next used RNA Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) to confirm the effects on
TERRA expression and to examine its cell and tissue localization. In wild-type control
and trt-1 mutant hermaphrodite and male worms, TERRA was expressed at low levels
in the soma as well as in the pachytene region of the meiotic germline (Figures 2B-D,
S3-4), which corresponds to the location of several lncRNA-mediated germline silencing
processes (Taylor et al., 2015), including Meiotic Silencing of Sex Chromosomes in
mammals and C. elegans (Heard and Turner, 2011) and a transcriptional burst of
piRNAs in mammals that primes genomic silencing in germ cells prior to gametogenesis
(Gou et al., 2014). Compared to both wild-type control and trt-1 or dcr-1 single mutant
strains, trt-1; dcr-1 double mutant strains had increased expression of TERRA in the
germline (Figures 2B-D, S3) and soma (Figures S3-4) by the F6 generation. We
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
observed an increase in the number of TERRA foci per nucleus in sRNA-deficient trt-1
mutants, which are likely to occur at telomeres (Figure 2D). We also observed TERRA
expression by RNA FISH in the cytoplasm and nucleoplasm of sRNA-deficient trt-1 cells
(Figure 2B-C, S3), which might be consistent with possible non-telomeric functions of
TERRA (Chu et al., 2017, Roake and Artandi, 2017) or with a role for TERRA in
protecting telomeres in trans (Montero et al., 2018). This suggests that endogenous
sRNAs may repress telomeric transcription in the absence of telomerase, although it is
possible that subtelomeric transcription increases in sRNA-deficient telomerase mutants
in response to telomeric DNA damage (Figure 1H).
Subtelomeric sRNAs are upregulated in telomerase mutants
Telomeric sRNAs have been observed in protists, plants, and mammals (Cao et al.,
2009, Couvillion et al., 2009, Vrbsky et al., 2010). We recently interrogated 92 publicly
available small RNA sequencing libraries created from RNA isolated from various C.
elegans strains and found rare reads that mapped perfectly to the C. elegans telomere
repeat (TTAGGC)n, occurring at a frequency of 1 per 10,000,000 reads (Frenk et al.,
2019). piRNAs with up to 3 mismatches can target regions of the C. elegans genome for
silencing (Bagijn et al., 2012), and we found that telomeric sRNAs with up to 3
mismatches were substantially more abundant than those with perfect telomere repeat
sequence (1 per 100,000) (Frenk et al., 2019). We compared levels of telomeric sRNAs
with mismatches from wildtype with those of mutants for small RNA genes that promote
telomere stability in the absence of telomerase, such as dcr-1, rde-4, mut-7, and mut-
14, and found that levels of telomeric sRNAs were sometimes depleted in these

## backgrounds, but not always (File S1).

We asked if loss of telomerase might alter levels of telomeric sRNAs in a manner that
might depend on Dicer by isolating RNA from wild-type control, trt-1 single mutant, and
trt-1; dcr-1 double mutant strains and preparing small RNA libraries. We sequenced
these libraries deeply in an effort to detect rare perfect telomeric sRNAs. We obtained
~20,000,000 reads each for 6 data sets and found that our trt-1; dcr-1 data sets were
strongly depleted of 22G RNAs that were previously reported to depend on dcr-1
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
(Figure S5A) (Gent et al., 2010). To assess TRT-1-dependent changes in sRNAs
throughout the genome, we counted the number of 22G reads mapping uniquely
antisense to protein-coding genes and found upregulation of sRNAs at 720 loci and
downregulation at 456 loci in trt-1 animals compared with wild-type controls (Figure
S5B). Of the upregulated loci, 465 were not upregulated in trt-1; dcr-1 animals
compared with wildtype, indicating DCR-1 dependence. We did not find significant GO
terms in loci with either up or downregulated sRNA production. Given that trt-1 is
expressed at high levels in C. elegans germ cells (Meier et al., 2006), we asked whether
the loci with differential sRNA production were enriched for germline-enriched genes.
We used previously published data on germline expression (Ortiz et al., 2014) and
found significant enrichment for germline-enriched genes in both upregulated and
downregulated loci (p < 1e-19 and p < 1e-33 respectively, Pearson’s Chi Square test
with Bonferroni correction) (Figure S5C). This may reflect an epigenetic response to
deficiency for telomerase in germ cells, even though early-generation trt-1 mutants from
which the RNA was prepared had normal levels of fertility. sRNAs mapping to
transposons were unaffected by loss of TRT-1, with the exception of the CER-10 LTR
retrotransposon, for which sRNAs were three-fold downregulated (Figure S5D).
We found that levels of telomeric sRNAs with 1 to 3 mismatches did not change
substantially in sRNAs from trt-1 single mutants or trt-1; dcr-1 double mutants, but

## detected no sRNAs composed of perfect telomere repeats in any genetic background

(Figure 4A). We next examined 22G RNAs at subtelomeric regions (defined as 2kb of
sequence adjacent to each telomere) and found that these were present in wild-type
samples at the left end of chromosome III, and that their abundance was increased two-
fold in trt-1 single mutants and their presence almost entirely eliminated in trt-1; dcr-1
double mutants (Figure 4C, E). Subtelomeric sRNAs were also observed within 1kb of
the telomere at the left ends of chromosomes I and IV in trt-1 mutants and not in
wildtype or trt-1; dcr-1 double mutants (Figure 4B, D). The right ends of Chromosomes I
and III and the left end of Chromosome II all showed at least a two-fold increase in
subtelomeric sRNAs in trt-1 and/or trt-1; dcr-1 double mutants (Figure 4E). We
observed a significant bias for subtelomeric sRNAs whose sequences correspond to the
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
C-rich telomere strand (antisense to TERRA) for the left ends of Chromosomes I and III
(p < 1e-13 and p < 1e-43 respectively, binomial test with Bonferroni correction) and for
the right arm of Chromosome I (p < 1e-172, binomial test with Bonferroni correction)
while the nucleotide sequences of subtelomeric sRNAs at the left arm of Chromosome
IV and the right arm of Chromosome III showed a bias for subtelomeric TERRA,
suggesting that they were created from RNA containing the C-rich telomeric sequence
(p < 1e-11, p = 0.006 respectively, binomial test with Bonferroni correction) (Figure 4F).
These observations suggest that telomere dysfunction triggers the upregulation of small
RNA biogenesis at multiple subtelomeres through both DCR-1-dependent and -
independent mechanisms. sRNA biogenesis might be induced at a subset of
subtelomeres when telomerase is dysfunctional because 1) shortened telomeres
inherited from trt-1 mutant gametes that created trt-1 single mutants might trigger sRNA
biogenesis, or 2) DNA damage that occurs stochastically at specific subtelomeres elicits
sRNA biogenesis. Subtelomeric siRNAs that correspond to the G- or C-rich telomeric
strand at specific subtelomeres could be related to the presence of transcripts that can
be targeted for sRNA biogenesis at these telomeres.
We next interrogated data sets of small RNAs that immunoprecipitate with Argonaute
proteins that are known to promote silencing in the germline, HRDE-1 and WAGO-1, as
well as with the germline anti-silencing Argonaute CSR-1 (Gu et al., 2009, Claycomb et
al., 2009, Ashe et al., 2012). Enrichment of small RNAs for each protein was calculated
by dividing the number of reads in the immunoprecipitate library by the number of reads
in the corresponding input library. Telomeric sRNAs were enriched in WAGO-1
immunoprecipate relative to input, but this was not the case for HRDE-1 or CSR-1
(Figure 3D). Enrichment of subtelomeric small RNAs in WAGO-1 was detected at all
chromosome ends tested apart from the right arm of Chromosome I (some
chromosome ends were not tested due to an absence of reads in the input library).
Enrichment was also detected for HRDE-1 at all chromosome ends excluding the right
arm of Chromosome I and the left arm of Chromosome III (Figure 3E). Interestingly,
CSR-1 showed the opposite pattern of enrichment to WAGO-1 and HRDE-1, with
enrichment at none of the chromosome ends apart from the right end of Chromosome I.
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
The ribosomal DNA, the most highly expressed locus in the C. elegans genome, is
immediately adjacent to this telomere (Wicky et al., 1996), and it is therefore possible
that sRNA activity takes a predominantly anti-silencing function at this chromosome
end. We asked if either Argonaute that associates with telomeric or sub-telomeric
sRNAs, WAGO-1 or to a lesser degree HRDE-1, promotes telomere maintenance in the
absence of telomerase and found that wago-1 trt-1 and trt-1; hrde-1 double mutants
both displayed rapid sterility phenotypes in comparison to trt-1 single mutants (p < 1e-
11 and p < 1e-12, respectively, log rank test) (Figure 1E).
Telomeric sRNAs and loss of EXO-1 repress sterility in the absence of telomerase
We considered simultaneously targetting the 11 unique subtelomeres of the C. elegans
genome with exogenous subtelomeric sRNAs in an effort to show that this class of
sRNAs promotes telomere stability in the absence of telomerase, but felt that this might
be difficult. Therefore, we decided to test the hypothesis that telomere repeat sRNAs

## can promote telomere stability in the absence of telomerase. We asked if introduction

of exogenous telomeric sRNAs could rescue the rapid sterility of sRNA-deficient trt-1
mutants using a viable dcr-1 allele, mg375, which is deficient for endogenous sRNA
production but is hypersensitive to exogenous RNAi when fed E. coli expressing dsRNA
(Welker et al., 2010). trt-1; dcr-1(mg375) double mutant strains that were passaged on
bacteria expressing telomeric dsRNA remained fertile significantly longer than those
expressing dsRNA from an empty vector control (Figure 4A). In contrast, exogenous
telomeric dsRNA did not affect the onset of sterility for trt-1 single mutant controls.
Moreover, trt-1; dcr-1(mg375) strains fed telomeric dsRNA had markedly reduced levels
of DNA damage at F6 in comparison to trt-1; dcr-1(mg375) strains grown on control
RNAi or on regular OP50 bacteria that do not express dsRNA (Figure 1F, 5C).
In budding yeast, artificially-induced TERRA overexpression promotes telomere
shortening in cis by forming RNA:DNA hybrids that stall telomeric replication forks in a
manner that stimulates telomere resection by the exonuclease Exo1 (Maicher et al.,
2012, Pfeiffer and Lingner, 2012). We therefore hypothesized that loss of EXO-1 might
rescue the accelerated sterility phenotype in sRNA-deficient telomerase mutants. trt-1;
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
exo-1; mut-14 triple mutant lines survived significantly longer than trt-1; mut-14 double
mutants (Figure 5B) and displayed reduced levels of DNA damage and moderate levels
of TERRA at generation F6 (Figures 5B, S5). Moreover, trt-1; exo-1 double mutant
controls remained fertile even longer than trt-1 single mutants (Figure 5B), indicating
that EXO-1-mediated telomere resection promotes telomere-shortening-induced
senescence in the absence of telomerase, both at normal telomeres and at telomeres
lacking sRNA-mediated genomic silencing. While trt-1; exo-1 double mutant controls
remained fertile longer than trt-1 single mutants, this was not true for trt-1 single
mutants grown on exogenous telomeric dsRNA (Figure 5A, B). Thus, exo-1 has at least
two roles at telomeres, one role that promotes sterility when telomerase is absent and a
second that promotes sterility when telomerase and sRNA silencing is absent.

## Discussion

Small RNAs promote genomic silencing of many types of transposons (Holoch and
Moazed, 2015), including those found at Drosophila melanogaster telomeres, which are
composed of non-LTR retrotransposons that are distinct from the simple repetitive
sequences that are maintained by telomerase and cap chromosome ends in most
organisms (Pardue and DeBaryshe, 2003). Components of the RNAi machinery
function at Drosophila telomeres to repress expression of HeT-A and TART
retrotransposons and their accumulation at chromosome termini (Pane et al., 2007,
Savitsky et al., 2006), even though they do not affect telomere capping (Perrini et al.,
2004). In contrast, loss of the Drosophila homologs of the heterochromatin-mediated
genome silencing proteins HP1 and ATRX causes immediate telomere deprotection and
fusion (Chavez et al., 2017, Fanti et al., 1998, Fulcher et al., 2014). H3K9me2 but not
H3K9me3 is present at wild-type C. elegans telomeres (Figure 3A-C) (McMurchy et al.,
2017, Zeller et al., 2016), and we found that the C. elegans HP1 homolog HPL-2 that
binds to and specifically stabilizes H3K9me2 (McMurchy et al., 2017) promotes
telomere stability in the absence of telomerase (Figure1C). We also identified factors
that create rare small RNAs that may guide the deposition of histone silencing marks in
response to damaged telomeres (Figure 6A). Therefore, small RNAs and
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
heterochromatin proteins represent conserved features of both non-canonical and
canonical telomeres, even though their functions are distinct.
Loss of telomerase and sRNA factors in C. elegans caused high levels of DNA damage
response signaling in germ cells, but did not result in telomere fusions for a number of
generations, each generation representing 8-10 cell divisions. Therefore, the
accelerated sterility phenotype of sRNA-deficient trt-1 mutants is not a consequence of
a defect in acute telomere uncapping, but rather an acceleration of the onset of crisis.

## Biochemical analysis of telomere erosion in sRNA-deficient trt-1 mutants revealed

increased variance in telomere size, which could be due to an error-prone
recombinational response to a form of DNA damage such as a stalled replication fork
(Figure 6C-D). Although both elongation and shortening of telomeres were observed
(Figure S1,S2), we propose that rapid telomere shortening events are likely responsible
for the premature end-to-end chromosome fusion and sterility phenotypes of sRNA-
deficient trt-1 mutants. In telomerase single mutants that are proficient for sRNA
biogenesis and heterochromatin deposition, telomeric DNA damage may be healed in a
manner that more accurately maintains telomere length and is coupled to expression
and subsequent sRNA-mediated silencing of TERRA (Figure 6A-B).
Heterochromatin is known to suppress replication-based DNA damage at repetitive
segments of the genome (Zeller et al., 2016, Janssen et al., 2018). However, repeated

## crossing of a trt-1 mutation into a dcr-1 mutant background failed to exacerbate the

accelerated sterility of trt-1; dcr-1 double mutants (Figure 1F), indicating that dcr-
1(mg375) mutants have telomeres of normal length. Therefore, telomerase-mediated
telomere repeat addition is likely to be an effective method of healing telomeric DNA
damage in the absence of sRNA-mediated heterochromatin deposition.
Loss of telomeric sRNA biogenesis in telomerase mutants resulted in TERRA
expression, which could create R-loops that induce homologous recombination in a
manner that creates telomere shortening events that are toxic (Figure 6C). As
exogenous telomeric sRNAs were sufficient to suppress telomere instability, DNA
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
damage signaling and TERRA expression in the absence of telomerase and
endogenous sRNAs (Figure 5), silencing of TERRA could be an integral part of a
telomeric DNA damage response (Figure 6B,D) (Toubiana and Selig, 2018). These

## results are consistent with a role for TERRA expression in response to a distinct form of

telomeric damage that occurs in the presence of telomerase – acutely deprotected, non-
replicating telomeres – and is accompanied by production of telomeric sRNAs that
promote DNA damage response factor recruitment (Rossiello et al., 2017). In addition,
work in S. cerevisiae showed that increased TERRA expression and persistent
telomeric R-loops in telomerase mutants can repress senescence by promoting
recombination, indicating that increased levels of TERRA are coupled to induction of a
telomeric DNA damage response (Graf et al., 2017). Finally, elevated levels of TERRA
have been shown to contribute to senescence in S. cerevisiae (Wanat et al., 2018).
We observed reduced levels of TERRA and DNA damage signaling in sRNA-deficient
telomerase mutants that lack exo-1. Consistently, loss of EXO1 in telomerase-negative
mice has been shown to extend lifespan and improve organ maintenance by repressing
telomeric ssDNA formation and DNA damage response (Schaetzlein et al., 2007),
suggesting a conserved role for EXO1 in the metazoan response to dysfunctional
telomeres. Although expression of TERRA at mammalian telomeres induces EXO1-
dependent telomere shortening in a manner that independent of RNase H (Pfeiffer and
Lingner, 2012), we did not test a role for RNase H in the telomere instability phenotype
of sRNA-deficient C. elegans telomerase mutants.
We previously observed that C. elegans telomeric sRNAs with mismatches can be
mapped to Interstitial Telomere Sequences, which are degenerate telomere tracts that
are abundant on chromosomes arms and are distinct from telomeres (Frenk et al.,
2019). Interstitial Telomere Sequences were often heterochromatic and were markedly
depleted from exons and 5’ or 3’ UTRs (Frenk et al., 2019). Telomeric sRNAs with
mismatches were not altered by the dcr-1(mg375) mutation that causes telomere
instability in the absence of telomerase (Figure 4A). Although telomeric sRNAs with
mismatches contained a mixture of all four 5’ nucleotides, very rare sRNAs composed
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
of perfect telomere repeats were strongly depleted for 5’ G nucleotides (Frenk et al.,
2019). The unique structural property suggests a mechanism of biogenesis that is
distinct from known classes of C. elegans sRNAs (Billi et al., 2014). We found that
perfect telomeric sRNAs from the environment were sufficient to promote telomere
stability in trt-1; dcr-1 mutants (Figure 5A). This suggests that very rare perfect

## telomeric small RNAs, which might appear fleeting or artefactual based on analysis of

RNA sequencing data sets, promote telomere stability in the absence of telomerase.
Similar classes of rare small RNAs, which may be difficult (Frenk et al., 2019) or
impossible (Figure 4A) to measure, could be relevant to other segments of the genome.
As both Dicer and the dsRNA-binding protein RDE-4 promoted telomere stability in the
absence of telomerase (Figure 1B), we propose that biogenesis of telomeric small
RNAs could involve bidirectional transcripts that emanate from ITS tracts at internal
segments of the genome to create dsRNAs that contain both perfect and imperfect
telomere repeats (Frenk et al., 2019). ITS dsRNAs could interact with RDE-4 and Dicer
to create primary and secondary sRNA populations that could interact with TERRA
(Figure 6A). We detected subtelomeric sRNAs that were dependent on Dicer and that
interacted with the Argonaute proteins WAGO-1 and HRDE-1, both of which promoted
telomere stability in the absence of telomerase. These Argonaute proteins are known to
act in germ cells to target overlapping groups of transcripts, including genes,
transposons, and pseudogenes (Gu et al., 2009). Although WAGO-1 localizes to
perinuclear P-granules (germ granules), where it might promote either transcriptional or
post-transcriptional gene silencing (Gu et al., 2009), HRDE-1 localizes to the nucleus
where it promotes transcriptional gene silencing. Moreover, HRDE-1 and WAGO-1
have been shown to function redundantly to promote a form of permanent
transgenerational transcriptional silencing (Ashe et al., 2012, Buckley et al., 2012).
Although proteomics has been performed for both HRDE-1 and WAGO-1, they do not
physically interact with one another or possess common interacting proteins (Akay et
al., 2017, Shirayama et al., 2014).
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
We were unable to measure perfect telomeric sRNAs by deeply sequencing small

## RNAs from several genetic backgrounds (Figure 4A), but we observed upregulation of

sRNAs at some subtelomeres in telomerase mutants, and in some cases this increase
was DCR-1-dependent (Figure 4). We also found that HRDE-1 and WAGO-1 interact
with 22G sRNAs that map to distinct and overlapping subtelomeres. Given that DNA
damage responses induce histone modifications that can be propagated for long
distances from sites of DNA damage (Polo and Jackson, 2011), we propose that the
biological response to telomeric DNA damage initially may spread such that abundant
sRNAs are created from RNA transcripts at some subtelomeric loci. Therefore, the
variable sRNA biogenesis patterns observed at distinct subtelomeres of telomerase
mutants may reflect a wider epigenetic consequence of the biological response to
telomeric DNA damage.
In mammals, TERRA facilitates transcriptional regulation of the epigenome (Chu et al.,
2017). Moreover, both TERRA and telomerase have been implicated in regulation of
genes that promote stem cell proliferation (Marion et al., 2019, Sarin et al., 2005).
Therefore, the interplay of telomerase and TERRA in the context of deficiency for small
RNA-mediated genome silencing could reflect more general roles for these factors in
epigenetic regulation of cell fate.
sRNA-mediated telomeric silencing was promoted by the C. elegans secondary sRNA
biogenesis factor MUT-7 (Figure 1A, B), which is homologous to the exonuclease

## domain of human WRN1 Werner’s syndrome protein whose loss results in early-onset

aging of multiple tissues (Ketting et al., 2001). WRN1 deficiency is accompanied by
accelerated telomere erosion and senescence phenotypes that can be rescued by
telomerase expression (Shimamoto et al., 2015). While WRN1 and its homologs have
been intensively studied for their roles in DNA recombination, WRN1 safeguards the
stability of heterochromatin (Zhang et al., 2015), which our study suggests may play a
critical role in maintaining telomere stability in most human somatic cells. Consistently,
deficiency for DNA methylation at repetitive segments of the genome, including
telomeres, occurs in ICF syndrome cells that undergo rapid telomere shortening and
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
senescence accompanied by increased TERRA expression, telomeric R-loops and DNA
damage (Sagie et al., 2017). As global dysfunction of the epigenome is a hallmark of
human aging (Zhang et al., 2015), our findings may be generally relevant to
understanding how sRNA-driven chromatin states established in germ cells or the early
embryo might contribute to telomere instability during aging of adult somatic cells.
Data availability statement
RNA-seq data reported in this study are available under the accession number GEO:
GSE111800.
Acknowledgements
We thank R. Dowen for technical advice with qRT-PCR, K. Billmyre for advice on
immunofluorescence, and members of the S.A. laboratory for critical review of the
manuscript. Some strains were provided by the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center, which
is funded by National Institutes of Health Office of Research Infrastructure Programs
(P40 OD010440).
Funding
S.F., C.L. and S.A. were supported by National Institute of Health grant R01 GM135470
and R01 ES035777.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
References
AHMED, S. & HODGKIN, J. 2000. MRT-2 checkpoint protein is required for germline
immortality and telomere replication in C. elegans. Nature, 403, 159-64.
AKAY, A., DI DOMENICO, T., SUEN, K. M., NABIH, A., PARADA, G. E., LARANCE,
M., MEDHI, R., BERKYUREK, A. C., ZHANG, X., WEDELES, C. J., RUDOLPH,
K. L. M., ENGELHARDT, J., HEMBERG, M., MA, P., LAMOND, A. I.,
CLAYCOMB, J. M. & MISKA, E. A. 2017. The Helicase Aquarius/EMB-4 Is
Required to Overcome Intronic Barriers to Allow Nuclear RNAi Pathways to
Heritably Silence Transcription. Dev Cell, 42, 241-255 e6.
ARNOULT, N., VAN BENEDEN, A. & DECOTTIGNIES, A. 2012. Telomere length
regulates TERRA levels through increased trimethylation of telomeric H3K9 and
HP1alpha. Nat Struct Mol Biol, 19, 948-56.
ASHE, A., SAPETSCHNIG, A., WEICK, E. M., MITCHELL, J., BAGIJN, M. P.,
CORDING, A. C., DOEBLEY, A. L., GOLDSTEIN, L. D., LEHRBACH, N. J., LE
PEN, J., PINTACUDA, G., SAKAGUCHI, A., SARKIES, P., AHMED, S. & MISKA,
E. A. 2012. piRNAs Can Trigger a Multigenerational Epigenetic Memory in the
Germline of C. elegans. Cell, 150, 88-99.
AVGOUSTI, D. C., PALANI, S., SHERMAN, Y. & GRISHOK, A. 2012. CSR-1 RNAi
pathway positively regulates histone expression in C. elegans. EMBO J, 31,
3821-32.
AZZALIN, C. M. & LINGNER, J. 2015. Telomere functions grounding on TERRA firma.
Trends Cell Biol, 25, 29-36.
AZZALIN, C. M., REICHENBACH, P., KHORIAULI, L., GIULOTTO, E. & LINGNER, J.
2007. Telomeric repeat containing RNA and RNA surveillance factors at
mammalian chromosome ends. Science, 318, 798-801.
BAGIJN, M. P., GOLDSTEIN, L. D., SAPETSCHNIG, A., WEICK, E. M., BOUASKER,
S., LEHRBACH, N. J., SIMARD, M. J. & MISKA, E. A. 2012. Function, targets,
and evolution of Caenorhabditis elegans piRNAs. Science, 337, 574-8.
BATISTA, P. J., RUBY, J. G., CLAYCOMB, J. M., CHIANG, R., FAHLGREN, N.,
KASSCHAU, K. D., CHAVES, D. A., GU, W., VASALE, J. J., DUAN, S., CONTE,
D., JR., LUO, S., SCHROTH, G. P., CARRINGTON, J. C., BARTEL, D. P. &
MELLO, C. C. 2008. PRG-1 and 21U-RNAs interact to form the piRNA complex
required for fertility in C. elegans. Mol Cell, 31, 67-78.
BENETTI, R., GARCIA-CAO, M. & BLASCO, M. A. 2007. Telomere length regulates the
epigenetic status of mammalian telomeres and subtelomeres. Nat Genet, 39,
243-50.
BENETTI, R., SCHOEFTNER, S., MUNOZ, P. & BLASCO, M. A. 2008. Role of TRF2 in
the assembly of telomeric chromatin. Cell Cycle, 7, 3461-8.
BERNSTEIN, E., CAUDY, A. A., HAMMOND, S. M. & HANNON, G. J. 2001. Role for a
bidentate ribonuclease in the initiation step of RNA interference. Nature, 409,
363-6.
BILLI, A. C., FISCHER, S. E. & KIM, J. K. 2014. Endogenous RNAi pathways in C.
elegans. WormBook, 1-49.
BOERCKEL, J., WALKER, D. & AHMED, S. 2007. The Caenorhabditis elegans Rad17
homolog HPR-17 is required for telomere replication. Genetics, 176, 703-9.
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
BUCKLEY, B. A., BURKHART, K. B., GU, S. G., SPRACKLIN, G., KERSHNER, A.,
FRITZ, H., KIMBLE, J., FIRE, A. & KENNEDY, S. 2012. A nuclear Argonaute
promotes multigenerational epigenetic inheritance and germline immortality.
Nature, 489, 447-51.
BUSHNELL, B. 2016. BBMap short-read aligner, and other bioinformatics tools.
http://sourceforge.net/projects/bbmap/.
CANZIO, D., LARSON, A. & NARLIKAR, G. J. 2014. Mechanisms of functional
promiscuity by HP1 proteins. Trends Cell Biol, 24, 377-86.
CAO, F., LI, X., HIEW, S., BRADY, H., LIU, Y. & DOU, Y. 2009. Dicer independent
small RNAs associate with telomeric heterochromatin. RNA, 15, 1274-81.
CHAVEZ, J., MURILLO-MALDONADO, J. M., BAHENA, V., CRUZ, A. K.,
CASTANEDA-SORTIBRAN, A., RODRIGUEZ-ARNAIZ, R., ZURITA, M. &
VALADEZ-GRAHAM, V. 2017. dAdd1 and dXNP prevent genome instability by
maintaining HP1a localization at Drosophila telomeres. Chromosoma, 126, 697-
712.
CHENG, C., SHTESSEL, L., BRADY, M. M. & AHMED, S. 2012. Caenorhabditis
elegans POT-2 telomere protein represses a mode of alternative lengthening of
telomeres with normal telomere lengths. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 109, 7805-10.
CHU, H. P., CIFUENTES-ROJAS, C., KESNER, B., AEBY, E., LEE, H. G., WEI, C., OH,
H. J., BOUKHALI, M., HAAS, W. & LEE, J. T. 2017. TERRA RNA Antagonizes
ATRX and Protects Telomeres. Cell, 170, 86-101 e16.
CLAYCOMB, J.M., BATISTA, P.J., PANG, K.M., GU, W., VASALE, J.J., VAN
WOLFSWINKEL, J.C., CHAVES, D.A., SHIRAYAMA, M., MITANI, S., KETTING, R.F.,
CONTE D., MELLO C.C. (2009). The Argonaute CSR-1 and its 22G-RNA cofactors are
required for holocentric chromosome segregation. Cell 139, 123-134.
COUVILLION, M. T., LEE, S. R., HOGSTAD, B., MALONE, C. D., TONKIN, L. A.,
SACHIDANANDAM, R., HANNON, G. J. & COLLINS, K. 2009. Sequence,
biogenesis, and function of diverse small RNA classes bound to the Piwi family
proteins of Tetrahymena thermophila. Genes Dev, 23, 2016-32.
CUSANELLI, E., ROMERO, C. A. & CHARTRAND, P. 2013. Telomeric noncoding RNA
TERRA is induced by telomere shortening to nucleate telomerase molecules at
short telomeres. Mol Cell, 51, 780-91.
DAS, P. P., BAGIJN, M. P., GOLDSTEIN, L. D., WOOLFORD, J. R., LEHRBACH, N. J.,
SAPETSCHNIG, A., BUHECHA, H. R., GILCHRIST, M. J., HOWE, K. L.,
STARK, R., MATTHEWS, N., BEREZIKOV, E., KETTING, R. F., TAVARE, S. &
MISKA, E. A. 2008. Piwi and piRNAs act upstream of an endogenous siRNA
pathway to suppress Tc3 transposon mobility in the Caenorhabditis elegans
germline. Mol Cell, 31, 79-90.
DONATE, L. E. & BLASCO, M. A. 2011. Telomeres in cancer and ageing. Philos Trans
R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 366, 76-84.
FANTI, L., GIOVINAZZO, G., BERLOCO, M. & PIMPINELLI, S. 1998. The
heterochromatin protein 1 prevents telomere fusions in Drosophila. Mol Cell, 2,
527-38.
FLYNN, R. L., COX, K. E., JEITANY, M., WAKIMOTO, H., BRYLL, A. R., GANEM, N.
J., BERSANI, F., PINEDA, J. R., SUVA, M. L., BENES, C. H., HABER, D. A.,
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
BOUSSIN, F. D. & ZOU, L. 2015. Alternative lengthening of telomeres renders
cancer cells hypersensitive to ATR inhibitors. Science, 347, 273-7.
FRENK, S., LISTER-SHIMAUCHI, E. H. & AHMED, S. 2019. Telomeric small RNAs in
the genus Caenorhabditis. RNA.
FULCHER, N., DERBOVEN, E., VALUCHOVA, S. & RIHA, K. 2014. If the cap fits, wear
it: an overview of telomeric structures over evolution. Cell Mol Life Sci, 71, 847-
GENT, J. I., LAMM, A. T., PAVELEC, D. M., MANIAR, J. M., PARAMESWARAN, P.,
TAO, L., KENNEDY, S. & FIRE, A. Z. 2010. Distinct phases of siRNA synthesis
in an endogenous RNAi pathway in C. elegans soma. Mol Cell, 37, 679-89.
GOU, L. T., DAI, P., YANG, J. H., XUE, Y., HU, Y. P., ZHOU, Y., KANG, J. Y., WANG,
X., LI, H., HUA, M. M., ZHAO, S., HU, S. D., WU, L. G., SHI, H. J., LI, Y., FU, X.
D., QU, L. H., WANG, E. D. & LIU, M. F. 2014. Pachytene piRNAs instruct
massive mRNA elimination during late spermiogenesis. Cell Res, 24, 680-700.
GRAF, M., BONETTI, D., LOCKHART, A., SERHAL, K., KELLNER, V., MAICHER, A.,
JOLIVET, P., TEIXEIRA, M. T. & LUKE, B. 2017. Telomere Length Determines
TERRA and R-Loop Regulation through the Cell Cycle. Cell, 170, 72-85 e14.
GREER, E. L., MAURES, T. J., HAUSWIRTH, A. G., GREEN, E. M., LEEMAN, D. S.,
MARO, G. S., HAN, S., BANKO, M. R., GOZANI, O. & BRUNET, A. 2010.
Members of the H3K4 trimethylation complex regulate lifespan in a germline-
dependent manner in C. elegans. Nature, 466, 383-7.
GU, W., SHIRAYAMA, M., CONTE, D., JR., VASALE, J., BATISTA, P. J., CLAYCOMB,
J. M., MORESCO, J. J., YOUNGMAN, E. M., KEYS, J., STOLTZ, M. J., CHEN,
C. C., CHAVES, D. A., DUAN, S., KASSCHAU, K. D., FAHLGREN, N., YATES,
J. R., 3RD, MITANI, S., CARRINGTON, J. C. & MELLO, C. C. 2009. Distinct
argonaute-mediated 22G-RNA pathways direct genome surveillance in the C.
elegans germline. Mol Cell, 36, 231-44.
HAHNE, F. & IVANEK, R. 2016. Visualizing Genomic Data Using Gviz and

## Bioconductor. Methods Mol Biol, 1418, 335-51.

HAN, T., MANOHARAN, A. P., HARKINS, T. T., BOUFFARD, P., FITZPATRICK, C.,
CHU, D. S., THIERRY-MIEG, D., THIERRY-MIEG, J. & KIM, J. K. 2009. 26G
endo-siRNAs regulate spermatogenic and zygotic gene expression in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 106, 18674-9.
HEARD, E. & TURNER, J. 2011. Function of the sex chromosomes in mammalian
fertility. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol, 3, a002675.
HOLOCH, D. & MOAZED, D. 2015. RNA-mediated epigenetic regulation of gene
expression. Nat Rev Genet, 16, 71-84.
HOLOHAN, B., WRIGHT, W. E. & SHAY, J. W. 2014. Cell biology of disease:
Telomeropathies: an emerging spectrum disorder. J Cell Biol, 205, 289-99.
JANSSEN, A., COLMENARES, S. U. & KARPEN, G. H. 2018. Heterochromatin:
Guardian of the Genome. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol, 34, 265-288.
KASPER, D. M., GARDNER, K. E. & REINKE, V. 2014. Homeland security in the C.
elegans germ line: insights into the biogenesis and function of piRNAs.
Epigenetics, 9, 62-74.
KETTING, R. F., FISCHER, S. E., BERNSTEIN, E., SIJEN, T., HANNON, G. J. &
PLASTERK, R. H. 2001. Dicer functions in RNA interference and in synthesis of
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
small RNA involved in developmental timing in C. elegans. Genes Dev, 15, 2654-
KETTING, R. F., HAVERKAMP, T. H., VAN LUENEN, H. G. & PLASTERK, R. H. 1999.
Mut-7 of C. elegans, required for transposon silencing and RNA interference, is a
homolog of Werner syndrome helicase and RNaseD. Cell, 99, 133-41.
KNIGHT, S. W. & BASS, B. L. 2001. A role for the RNase III enzyme DCR-1 in RNA
interference and germ line development in Caenorhabditis elegans. Science,
293, 2269-71.
LANGMEAD, B., TRAPNELL, C., POP, M. & SALZBERG, S. L. 2009. Ultrafast and
memory-efficient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome.
Genome Biol, 10, R25.
LI, F., HUARTE, M., ZARATIEGUI, M., VAUGHN, M. W., SHI, Y., MARTIENSSEN, R. &
CANDE, W. Z. 2008. Lid2 is required for coordinating H3K4 and H3K9
methylation of heterochromatin and euchromatin. Cell, 135, 272-83.
LI, J. S., MIRALLES FUSTE, J., SIMAVORIAN, T., BARTOCCI, C., TSAI, J.,
KARLSEDER, J. & LAZZERINI DENCHI, E. 2017. TZAP: A telomere-associated
protein involved in telomere length control. Science, 355, 638-641.
LOVE, M. I., HUBER, W. & ANDERS, S. 2014. Moderated estimation of fold change
and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol, 15, 550.
LOVEJOY, C. A., LI, W., REISENWEBER, S., THONGTHIP, S., BRUNO, J., DE
LANGE, T., DE, S., PETRINI, J. H., SUNG, P. A., JASIN, M., ROSENBLUH, J.,
ZWANG, Y., WEIR, B. A., HATTON, C., IVANOVA, E., MACCONAILL, L.,
HANNA, M., HAHN, W. C., LUE, N. F., REDDEL, R. R., JIAO, Y., KINZLER, K.,
VOGELSTEIN, B., PAPADOPOULOS, N., MEEKER, A. K. & CONSORTIUM, A.
L. T. S. C. 2012. Loss of ATRX, genome instability, and an altered DNA damage
response are hallmarks of the alternative lengthening of telomeres pathway.
PLoS Genet, 8, e1002772.
MACIEJOWSKI, J. & DE LANGE, T. 2017. Telomeres in cancer: tumour suppression
and genome instability. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol, 18, 175-186.
MAICHER, A., KASTNER, L., DEES, M. & LUKE, B. 2012. Deregulated telomere
transcription causes replication-dependent telomere shortening and promotes
cellular senescence. Nucleic Acids Res, 40, 6649-59.
MARION, R. M., MONTERO, J. J., LOPEZ DE SILANES, I., GRANA-CASTRO, O.,
MARTINEZ, P., SCHOEFTNER, S., PALACIOS-FABREGA, J. A. & BLASCO, M.
A. 2019. TERRA regulate the transcriptional landscape of pluripotent cells
through TRF1-dependent recruitment of PRC2. Elife, 8.
MCMURCHY, A. N., STEMPOR, P., GAARENSTROOM, T., WYSOLMERSKI, B.,
DONG, Y., AUSSIANIKAVA, D., APPERT, A., HUANG, N., KOLASINSKA-
ZWIERZ, P., SAPETSCHNIG, A., MISKA, E. A. & AHRINGER, J. 2017. A team
of heterochromatin factors collaborates with small RNA pathways to combat
repetitive elements and germline stress. Elife, 6.
MEIER, B., BARBER, L. J., LIU, Y., SHTESSEL, L., BOULTON, S. J., GARTNER, A. &
AHMED, S. 2009. The MRT-1 nuclease is required for DNA crosslink repair and
telomerase activity in vivo in Caenorhabditis elegans. Embo J, 28, 3549-63.
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
MEIER, B., CLEJAN, I., LIU, Y., LOWDEN, M., GARTNER, A., HODGKIN, J. &
AHMED, S. 2006. trt-1 is the Caenorhabditis elegans catalytic subunit of
telomerase. PLoS Genet, 2, e18.
MONTERO, J. J., LOPEZ-SILANES, I., MEGIAS, D., M, F. F., CASTELLS-GARCIA, A.
& BLASCO, M. A. 2018. TERRA recruitment of polycomb to telomeres is
essential for histone trymethylation marks at telomeric heterochromatin. Nat
Commun, 9, 1548.
MORAVEC, M., WISCHNEWSKI, H., BAH, A., HU, Y., LIU, N., LAFRANCHI, L., KING,
M. C. & AZZALIN, C. M. 2016. TERRA promotes telomerase-mediated telomere
elongation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. EMBO Rep, 17, 999-1012.
ORTIZ, M. A., NOBLE, D., SOROKIN, E. P. & KIMBLE, J. 2014. A new dataset of
spermatogenic vs. oogenic transcriptomes in the nematode Caenorhabditis
elegans. G3 (Bethesda), 4, 1765-72.
PAK, J. & FIRE, A. 2007. Distinct populations of primary and secondary effectors during
RNAi in C. elegans. Science, 315, 241-4.
PANE, A., WEHR, K. & SCHUPBACH, T. 2007. zucchini and squash encode two
putative nucleases required for rasiRNA production in the Drosophila germline.
Dev Cell, 12, 851-62.
PARDUE, M. L. & DEBARYSHE, P. G. 2003. Retrotransposons provide an
evolutionarily robust non-telomerase mechanism to maintain telomeres. Annu
Rev Genet, 37, 485-511.
PERRINI, B., PIACENTINI, L., FANTI, L., ALTIERI, F., CHICHIARELLI, S., BERLOCO,
M., TURANO, C., FERRARO, A. & PIMPINELLI, S. 2004. HP1 controls telomere
capping, telomere elongation, and telomere silencing by two different
mechanisms in Drosophila. Mol Cell, 15, 467-76.
PFEIFFER, V. & LINGNER, J. 2012. TERRA promotes telomere shortening through
exonuclease 1-mediated resection of chromosome ends. PLoS Genet, 8,
e1002747.

## PHILLIPS, C. M., MCDONALD, K. L. & DERNBURG, A. F. 2009. Cytological analysis of

## meiosis in Caenorhabditis elegans. Methods Mol Biol, 558, 171-95.

PICKETT, H. A. & REDDEL, R. R. 2015. Molecular mechanisms of activity and
derepression of alternative lengthening of telomeres. Nat Struct Mol Biol, 22,
875-80.
POLO, S. E. & JACKSON, S. P. 2011. Dynamics of DNA damage response proteins at
DNA breaks: a focus on protein modifications. Genes Dev, 25, 409-33.
PORRO, A., FEUERHAHN, S., DELAFONTAINE, J., RIETHMAN, H., ROUGEMONT, J.
& LINGNER, J. 2014. Functional characterization of the TERRA transcriptome at
damaged telomeres. Nat Commun, 5, 5379.
QUINLAN, A. R. & HALL, I. M. 2010. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing
genomic features. Bioinformatics, 26, 841-2.
REINHART, B. J. & BARTEL, D. P. 2002. Small RNAs correspond to centromere
heterochromatic repeats. Science, 297, 1831.
ROAKE, C. M. & ARTANDI, S. E. 2017. Approaching TERRA Firma: Genomic
Functions of Telomeric Noncoding RNA. Cell, 170, 8-9.
ROSSIELLO, F., AGUADO, J., SEPE, S., IANNELLI, F., NGUYEN, Q., PITCHIAYA, S.,
CARNINCI, P. & D'ADDA DI FAGAGNA, F. 2017. DNA damage response
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
inhibition at dysfunctional telomeres by modulation of telomeric DNA damage
response RNAs. Nat Commun, 8, 13980.
SAGIE, S., TOUBIANA, S., HARTONO, S. R., KATZIR, H., TZUR-GILAT, A.,
HAVAZELET, S., FRANCASTEL, C., VELASCO, G., CHEDIN, F. & SELIG, S.
2017. Telomeres in ICF syndrome cells are vulnerable to DNA damage due to
elevated DNA:RNA hybrids. Nat Commun, 8, 14015.
SAKAGUCHI, A., SARKIES, P., SIMON, M., DOEBLEY, A. L., GOLDSTEIN, L. D.,
HEDGES, A., IKEGAMI, K., ALVARES, S. M., YANG, L., LAROCQUE, J. R.,
HALL, J., MISKA, E. A. & AHMED, S. 2014. Caenorhabditis elegans RSD-2 and
RSD-6 promote germ cell immortality by maintaining small interfering RNA
populations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 111, E4323-31.
SARIN, K. Y., CHEUNG, P., GILISON, D., LEE, E., TENNEN, R. I., WANG, E.,
ARTANDI, M. K., ORO, A. E. & ARTANDI, S. E. 2005. Conditional telomerase
induction causes proliferation of hair follicle stem cells. Nature, 436, 1048-52.
SAVITSKY, M., KWON, D., GEORGIEV, P., KALMYKOVA, A. & GVOZDEV, V. 2006.
Telomere elongation is under the control of the RNAi-based mechanism in the
Drosophila germline. Genes Dev, 20, 345-54.
SCHAETZLEIN, S., KODANDARAMIREDDY, N. R., JU, Z., LECHEL, A.,
STEPCZYNSKA, A., LILLI, D. R., CLARK, A. B., RUDOLPH, C., KUHNEL, F.,
WEI, K., SCHLEGELBERGER, B., SCHIRMACHER, P., KUNKEL, T. A.,
GREENBERG, R. A., EDELMANN, W. & RUDOLPH, K. L. 2007. Exonuclease-1
deletion impairs DNA damage signaling and prolongs lifespan of telomere-
dysfunctional mice. Cell, 130, 863-77.
SHAY, J. W. 2016. Role of Telomeres and Telomerase in Aging and Cancer. Cancer
Discov, 6, 584-93.
SHIMAMOTO, A., YOKOTE, K. & TAHARA, H. 2015. Werner Syndrome-specific
induced pluripotent stem cells: recovery of telomere function by reprogramming.
Front Genet, 6, 10.
SHIRAYAMA, M., STANNEY, W., 3RD, GU, W., SETH, M. & MELLO, C. C. 2014. The
Vasa Homolog RDE-12 engages target mRNA and multiple argonaute proteins to
promote RNAi in C. elegans. Curr Biol, 24, 845-51.
STEINER, F. A., OKIHARA, K. L., HOOGSTRATE, S. W., SIJEN, T. & KETTING, R. F.
2009. RDE-1 slicer activity is required only for passenger-strand cleavage during
RNAi in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nat Struct Mol Biol, 16, 207-11.
TABARA, H., YIGIT, E., SIOMI, H. & MELLO, C. C. 2002. The dsRNA binding protein
RDE-4 interacts with RDE-1, DCR-1, and a DExH-box helicase to direct RNAi in
C. elegans. Cell, 109, 861-71.
TAYLOR, D. H., CHU, E. T., SPEKTOR, R. & SOLOWAY, P. D. 2015. Long non-coding
RNA regulation of reproduction and development. Mol Reprod Dev, 82, 932-56.
TEAM, R. C. 2017. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org/.
TIJSTERMAN, M., KETTING, R. F., OKIHARA, K. L., SIJEN, T. & PLASTERK, R. H.
2002. RNA helicase MUT-14-dependent gene silencing triggered in C. elegans
by short antisense RNAs. Science, 295, 694-7.
TOUBIANA, S. & SELIG, S. 2018. DNA:RNA hybrids at telomeres - when it is better to
be out of the (R) loop. FEBS J, 285, 2552-2566.
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
UDUGAMA, M., FT, M. C., CHAN, F. L., TANG, M. C., PICKETT, H. A., JD, R. M.,
MAYNE, L., COLLAS, P., MANN, J. R. & WONG, L. H. 2015. Histone variant
H3.3 provides the heterochromatic H3 lysine 9 tri-methylation mark at telomeres.
Nucleic Acids Res, 43, 10227-37.
VRBSKY, J., AKIMCHEVA, S., WATSON, J. M., TURNER, T. L., DAXINGER, L.,
VYSKOT, B., AUFSATZ, W. & RIHA, K. 2010. siRNA-mediated methylation of
Arabidopsis telomeres. PLoS Genet, 6, e1000986.
WANAT, J. J., LOGSDON, G. A., DRISKILL, J. H., DENG, Z., LIEBERMAN, P. M. &
JOHNSON, F. B. 2018. TERRA and the histone methyltransferase Dot1
cooperate to regulate senescence in budding yeast. PLoS One, 13, e0195698.
WEDELES, C. J., WU, M. Z. & CLAYCOMB, J. M. 2013. Protection of germline gene
expression by the C. elegans Argonaute CSR-1. Dev Cell, 27, 664-71.
WELKER, N. C., PAVELEC, D. M., NIX, D. A., DUCHAINE, T. F., KENNEDY, S. &
BASS, B. L. 2010. Dicer's helicase domain is required for accumulation of some,
but not all, C. elegans endogenous siRNAs. RNA, 16, 893-903.
WICKY, C., VILLENEUVE, A. M., LAUPER, N., CODOUREY, L., TOBLER, H. &
MULLER, F. 1996. Telomeric repeats (TTAGGC)n are sufficient for chromosome
capping function in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 93, 8983-
WONG, L. H., MCGHIE, J. D., SIM, M., ANDERSON, M. A., AHN, S., HANNAN, R. D.,
GEORGE, A. J., MORGAN, K. A., MANN, J. R. & CHOO, K. H. 2010. ATRX
interacts with H3.3 in maintaining telomere structural integrity in pluripotent
embryonic stem cells. Genome Res, 20, 351-60.
ZELLER, P., PADEKEN, J., VAN SCHENDEL, R., KALCK, V., TIJSTERMAN, M. &
GASSER, S. M. 2016. Histone H3K9 methylation is dispensable for
Caenorhabditis elegans development but suppresses RNA:DNA hybrid-
associated repeat instability. Nat Genet, 48, 1385-1395.
ZHANG, W., LI, J., SUZUKI, K., QU, J., WANG, P., ZHOU, J., LIU, X., REN, R., XU, X.,
OCAMPO, A., YUAN, T., YANG, J., LI, Y., SHI, L., GUAN, D., PAN, H., DUAN,
S., DING, Z., LI, M., YI, F., BAI, R., WANG, Y., CHEN, C., YANG, F., LI, X.,
WANG, Z., AIZAWA, E., GOEBL, A., SOLIGALLA, R. D., REDDY, P., ESTEBAN,
C. R., TANG, F., LIU, G. H. & BELMONTE, J. C. 2015. Aging stem cells. A
Werner syndrome stem cell model unveils heterochromatin alterations as a driver
of human aging. Science, 348, 1160-3.
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
Figure 1: Endogenous small RNA and chromatin factors repress telomere stability in
the absence of telomerase. (A) Survival curve of telomerase-deficient strains passaged
at ~100 worms weekly for 40 independent lines. One allele of xnp-1(ok1823) extended
survival but did not increase survival via ALT (Table S1). The same wild type control
data is shown in panels B-F. (B) Survival curve of primary or secondary sRNA deficient
telomerase mutants when 6 larval L1s are passaged weekly. (C) Survival curve of
double mutants for trt-1 and chromatin factors passaged by 6 L1s weekly. (D) Histone
H3.3 remodeling protein XNP-1 represses senescence in trt-1 mutants epistatically to
the small RNA factor MUT-7. (E) Loss of HRDE-1 or WAGO-1 Argonaute proteins

## mimics the accelerated sterility observed in a trt-1; dcr-1 mutant background. (F) A trt-

certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
1; dcr-1 strain was crossed with dcr-1 males fifteen times to yield a trt-1; dcr-1 15x strain
that displayed the same accelerated sterility observed for the initial trt-1; dcr-1 double
mutants. (G) Small RNA and heterochromatin mutant trt-1 lines have high levels of
chromosome fusions, comparable to trt-1 single mutants at F24. Fusions were assayed
by diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining of oocytes in diakinesis. Each bivalent in
wildtype represents a single paired chromosome. Representative images of DAPI-
stained oocyte nuclei are shown in panels below the graph. (H) High levels of phospho-
(Ser/Thr) staining in the meiotic gonad of trt-1; dcr-1 at F6 compared to N2 or trt-1.
Scale bar, 25 m. (B)-(D), (F) ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.00001; ns, not significant, (Log
rank test, n=40 independent lines for each genotype). (E) trt-1; wago-1 = 39 lines per
genotype. trt-1; hrde-1 and trt-1; dcr-1 = 33 lines per genotype.
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
Figure 2: (A) Expression of TERRA from subtelomeres IIIL, VR, and XL is increased in
sRNA and heterochromatin deficient telomerase mutants. cDNA was reverse
transcribed with a telomere specific primer and qPCR was performed using
subtelomere-specific primer pairs and normalized to act-1. Expression data are plotted
relative to wildtype and represent the mean ± SEM of three biological replicates. (B)
RNA FISH signals of TERRA in meiotic germlines of hermaphrodites of the indicated
genotypes. TERRA foci are present in wildtype and trt-1 in the pachytene region and
increased in trt-1; dcr-1. Scale bar, 10um. (C) Representative RNA FISH images of
TERRA in males show foci in the pachytene region of the germline which are increased
in trt-1; dcr-1 compared to trt-1. Scale bar, 20 um. (D) Quantification of germline
TERRA foci (mean ± SEM, n=10 germlines).
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:

## Figure 3: Analysis of telomeric chromatin and small RNAs in published datasets. (A)-

(C) ChIP-seq enrichment profiles at three chromosome ends constructed using
published data (McMurchy et al., 2017, Zeller et al., 2016). Small orange arrows
between gene models and data tracks show the position of primers used in TERRA
qRT-PCR experiments. (D) Enrichment (IP/input) of reads mapping to perfect telomere
sequence with up to three mismatches in published immunoprecipitation datasets for
three different Argonaute proteins. (E) Enrichment for subtelomeric sRNAs for datasets
used in (D).
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
Figure 4: Upregulation of subtelomeric sRNAs in telomerase mutants. (A) Number of
telomere-mapping reads in wild-type, trt-1, and trt-1;dcr-1 libraries. Numbers 1-3
indicate number of mismatches. (B)-(D) 22G sRNAs at three subtelomeres. (E) Log2-
fold change in sRNA abundance at subtelomeres relative to wildtype in trt-1 and trt-1;
dcr-1 animals. (F) Proportion of subtelomeric sRNAs mapping to the strand
corresponding to the G-rich (TTAGGC) and C-rich (TAAGCC) telomere strand in trt-1
animals. **** p < 0.0001; ** p < 0.01; ns, not significant (Binomial test with Bonferroni
correction). The p values refer to the probability of observing the given proportion of G-rich
or C-rich telomeric reads at each chromosome end under the null hypothesis that G- and
C-rich reads are present in equal proportions.
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
Figure 5: Fast senescence in sRNA-deficient trt-1 is rescued by exogenous telomeric
dsRNA or loss of Exonuclease-1. (A) Survival of trt-1 or trt-1; dcr-1(mg375) on either
empty vector control (EV) or bacteria expressing telomeric double-stranded RNA (telo
dsRNA). Log rank test relative to EV, ***P < 0.001. n=40 lines per genotype. (B) Loss
of exo-1 extends survival of trt-1; mut-14 lines. n=40 lines per genotype. (C) Telomeric
dsRNA and loss of exo-1 suppress accumulation of phospho-(Ser/Thr) in sRNA-
deficient trt-1 by F6. Scale bar=20um.
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
Figure 6: Model for TERRA, small RNAs and telomerase. A) In trt-1 telomerase
mutants, telomeric erosion induces expression of the lncRNA TERRA, which engages
production of sub-telomeric and telomeric sRNAs. Small RNAs promote deposition of
H3K9me2 and H3K4 demethylation in order to repress TERRA expression DNA
damage, and trt-1 mutant sterility. B) TERRA expression and silencing may occur in the
context of a DNA damage response. C) In trt-1; dcr-1 double mutants, TERRA
expression is not repressed, which may cause RNA:DNA hybrids and a form of
recombination that is dependent on the nuclease EXO-1 and leads to rapid sterility. D)
Lack of sRNAs may induce an aberrant recombinational response to DNA damage that

## results in telomere elongation or shortening.

certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
Supplemental Information
5 Supplemental Figures
3 Supplemental Tables
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:

## Figure S1. Related to Figure 1. Terminal Restriction Fragment (TFR) analysis of

single-mutant trt-1, mut-7, and dcr-1 and double-mutant trt-1; mut-7 and trt-1; dcr-1
strains using a telomeric probe. (A) Southern blot of samples generated by passaging
small groups of worms for multiple generations. Two independent trt-1 lines were used.

## Long telomeres observed in strains derived from mut-7 or dcr-1 mutant background

## could be due to rare stochastic telomere elongation events in these backgrounds. (B)

Quantification of telomere shortening rate for each genotype shown in panel A. No
significant difference was found between any genotypes by Mann Whitney U test.
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:

## Figure S2. Related to Figure 1. TRF analysis of RNAi-deficient telomerase mutant

strains using telomeric probe. A) A single parental F2 plate was used to generate
multiple F4 plates derived from single worms. F4 trt-1 single mutant lanes show
consistent bands corresponding to slight shortening of parental bands. In contrast, F4
lanes from trt-1; mut-7 and trt-1; dcr-1 show highly variable bands that in some cases
cannot be traced to an obvious parental band. B) Quantification of telomere shortening
rate based on pairing bands appearing at F2 with the closest bands appearing at F4.
Highly smeared lanes were excluded. Each point represents one pair of bands.
Comparing trt-1 and trt-1; mut-7 or trt-1; dcr-1, mean shortening rate was not
significantly different (p= 0.84 and 0.77, Welch’s t-test) but variance was significantly
higher for both double-mutants (p=7.2e-15 and 1.5e-12, F-test). Variance was not
significantly different between the double-mutants (p=0.32).
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
Figure S3. Related to Figure 2. TERRA expression (yellow) in trt-1 and trt-1; dcr-
1(mg375) 1-day-old adults detected with a Cy5-labelled telomeric probe.
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
Figure S4. Related to Figure 2. RNA FISH of TERRA expression in trt-1 and trt-1; dcr-
1 males. Note TERRA foci in the Pachytene region in both trt-1 and trt-1; dcr-1, as well
as lack of expression in the mitotic region and spermatocytes
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:

## Figure S5. Related to Figure 3. Analysis of 22G small RNA species in telomerase and

Dicer mutants. (A) Number of reads mapping to DCR-1 targets identified by Gent et al.
(Gent et al., 2010). (B) log2 normalized mean read counts at every C. elegans gene for
trt-1 and wildtype. Genes identified as significantly differentially expressed by DESeq2
are shown in red. ( C) Proportion of all genes or genes downregulated (trt1_dn) or
upregulated (trt1_up) belonging to expression categories defined by Ortiz et al. (see
reference 54 in main text). (D) log2 normalized mean read counts at transposon
consensus sequences for trt-1 and wildtype.
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:

## Supplemental Table S1. Related to Figure 1. Statistical analysis of ALT survival in

double mutant strains compared to single mutant trt-1 control. The Z score represents
how many standard deviations from the number of ALT survivors in double mutants is
from the trt-1 single mutant control mean survival rate. The p-value represents the
probability that the number of survivors via ALT is not significantly different from the
control trt-1 single mutant strain.
Lines
tested
Number ALT
survivors
Z score
p-value (two
tailed)
trt-1
trt-1; mut-7(pk204)
0.68
0.50
trt-1; mut-14(pk738)
0.68
0.50
trt-1 xnp-1(ok1823)
trt-1 xnp-1(tm678)
0.68
0.50
trt-1; dcr-1 (mg375)
0.32
0.75
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:

## Supplemental Table S2. Related to Figure 1. Log rank analysis of survival curves of

double or triple mutants compare to single mutant trt-1 controls. n=40 independent lines
for each genotype. Strains were passaged by transferring 6 larval L1s weekly and
scored as sterile when plates contained no new L1 larvae. The p-value represents the
probability that there is no difference in the probability of sterility at any time point
between the double or triple mutant strain and the trt-1 single mutant strain.
Strain
Log Rank test (Z=)
p-value
trt-1; mut-7(pk204)
9.79
<0.00001
trt-1; mut-14(pk738)
9.96
<0.00001
trt-1; dcr-1(mg375)
9.37
<0.00001
trt-1; rde-1
8.23
<0.00001
trt-1; rde-4
9.21
<0.00001
trt-1; rrf-3
<0.00001
trt-1; rrf-2
0.089
trt-1; exo-1
7.38
<0.00001
trt-1 xnp-1(ok1823)
<0.00001
trt-1 xnp-1(tm678)
4.23
<0.0001
trt-1 xnp-1(tm678); mut-7
9.21
<0.00001
trt-1; sid-1
6.52
<0.00001
trt-1; rbr-2(tm1231)
8.64
<0.00001
trt-1; spr-5 (by101)
8.89
<0.00001
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi:
trt-1 F1
males
dead embryos
trt-1; dcr-1 F1
males
dead embryos
Supplemental Table S3. Related to Figure 1. Counts of total F2 males and dead
embryos scored for F1 progeny from crosses of wild-type males with either late-
generation F16 trt-1 mutant controls (n=2 independently grown strains, three F1 scored
for strain A and four F1 for strain D) or early generation F4 trt-1; dcr-1 double mutant
(n=4 strains, 4 F1 each scored for strains A, B, C, and D) hermaphrodites. If a
chromosome fusion is present in any of the F1 animals, then it will cause weak non-
disjunction of the fused chromosomes, which leads to F2 dead embryos if an autosome
is fused or to F2 males if the X chromosome is fused.
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
this version posted May 15, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1101/292722
doi: